Project Gutenberg's The Uttermost Farthing, by Marie Belloc Lowndes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Uttermost Farthing

Author: Marie Belloc Lowndes

Release Date: July 28, 2006 [EBook #18927]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UTTERMOST FARTHING ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                         THE UTTERMOST FARTHING

                         BY MRS. BELLOC LOWNDES

                                  1910




COLLECTION OF BRITISH AUTHORS
_COPYRIGHT EDITION_
VOL. 4174.
LEIPZIG: BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ.
PARIS: LIBRAIRIE H. GAULON & CIE, 39, RUE MADAME.
PARIS: THE GALIGNANI LIBRARY, 224, RUE DE RIVOLI, AND AT NICE, 8, AVENUE
MASSENA.




"Thou shalt by no means come out thence till thou hast paid the
uttermost farthing."




I.


Laurence Vanderlyn, unpaid attache at the American Embassy in Paris,
strode down the long grey platform marked No. 5, of the Gare de Lyon. It
was seven o'clock, the hour at which Paris is dining or is about to
dine, and the huge station was almost deserted.

The train de luxe had gone more than an hour ago, the Riviera rapide
would not start till ten, but one of those trains bound for the South,
curiously named demi-rapides, was timed to leave in twenty minutes.

Foreigners, especially Englishmen and Americans, avoid these trains, and
this was why Laurence Vanderlyn had chosen it as the starting point of
what was to be a great adventure, an adventure which must for ever be
concealed, obliterated as much as may be from his own memory--do not men
babble in delirium?--once life had again become the rather grey thing he
had found it to be.

In the domain of the emotions it is the unexpected which generally
happens, and now it was not only the unexpected but the incredible which
had happened to this American diplomatist. He and Margaret Pargeter, the
Englishwoman whom he had loved with an absorbing, unsatisfied passion,
and an ever-increasing concentration and selfless devotion, for seven
years, were about to do that which each had sworn, together and
separately, should never come to pass,--that is, they were about to
snatch from Fate a few days of such free happiness and communion as
during their long years of intimacy they had never enjoyed. In order to
secure these fleeting moments of joy, she, the woman in the case, was
about to run the greatest risk which can in these days be incurred by
civilised woman.

Margaret Pargeter was not free as Vanderlyn was free; she was a
wife,--not a happy wife, but one on whose reputation no shadow had ever
rested,--and further, she was the mother of a child, a son, whom she
loved with an anxious tenderness.... It was these two facts which made
what she was going to do a matter of such moment not only to herself,
but to the man to whom she was now about to commit her honour.

Striding up and down the platform to which he had bought early access by
one of those large fees for which the travelling American of a certain
type is famed, Vanderlyn, with his long lean figure, and stern
pre-occupied face, did not suggest, to the French eyes idly watching
him, a lover,--still less the happy third in one of those conjugal
comedies which play so much greater a part in French literature and in
French drama than they do in French life. He had thrust far back into
his heart the leaping knowledge of what was about to befall him, and he
was bending the whole strength of his mind to avert any possible danger
of ignoble catastrophe to the woman whom he was awaiting, and whose
sudden surrender was becoming more, instead of less, amazing as the long
minutes dragged by.

Vanderlyn's mind went back to the moment, four short days ago, when this
journey had been suddenly arranged. Mrs. Pargeter had just come back
from England, where she had gone to pay some family visits and to see
her little son, who was at a preparatory school; and the American
diplomatist, as was so often his wont, had come to escort her to one of
those picture club shows in which Parisian society delights.

Then, after a quarter of an hour spent by them at the exhibition, the
two friends had slipped away, and had done a thing which was perhaps
imprudent. But each longed, with an unspoken eager craving, to be alone
with the other; the beauty of Paris in springtime tempted them, and it
was the woman who had proposed to the man that they should spend a quiet
hour walking through one of those quarters of old Paris unknown to the
travelling foreigner.

Eagerly Vanderlyn had assented, and so they had driven quickly down the
Rue de Rivoli, right into the heart of that commercial quarter which was
the Paris of Madame de Sevigne, of the bitter witty dwarf, Scarron, of
Ninon de l'Enclos, and, more lately, of Victor Hugo. There, dismissing
their cab, they had turned into that still, stately square, once the old
Place Royale, now the Place des Vosges, of which each arcaded house
garners memories of passionate romance.

Walking slowly up and down the solitary garden there, the two had
discussed the coming August, and Margaret Pargeter had admitted, with a
rather weary sigh, that she was as yet quite ignorant whether her
husband intended to yacht, to shoot, or to travel,--whether he meant to
take her with him, or to leave her at some seaside place with the boy.

As she spoke, in the low melodious voice which still had the power to
thrill the man by her side as it had had in the earlier days of their
acquaintance, Mrs. Pargeter said no word that all the world might not
have heard, yet, underlying all she said, his questions and her answers,
was the mute interrogation--which of the alternatives discussed held out
the best chance, to Vanderlyn and herself, of being together?

At last, quite suddenly, Mrs. Pargeter, turning and looking up into her
companion's face, had said something which Laurence Vanderlyn had felt
to be strangely disconcerting; for a brief moment she lifted the veil
which she had herself so deliberately and for so long thrown over their
ambiguous relation--"Ah! Laurence," she exclaimed with a sigh, "the way
of the transgressor is hard!"

Then, speaking so quietly that for a moment he did not fully understand
the amazing nature of the proposal she was making to him, she had
deliberately offered to go away with him--for a week. The way in which
this had come about had been strangely simple; looking back, Vanderlyn
could scarcely believe that his memory was playing him true....

From the uncertain future they had come back to the immediate present,
and Mrs. Pargeter said something of having promised her only intimate
friend, a Frenchwoman much older than herself, a certain Madame de Lera,
to go and spend a few days in a villa near Paris--"If you do that," he
said, "then I think I may as well go down to Orange and see the house
I've just bought there."

She had turned on him with a certain excitement in her manner. "You've
bought it? That strange, beautiful place near Orange where you used to
stay when you were studying in Paris? Oh, Laurence, I'd no idea that you
really meant to buy it!"

A little surprised at the keenness of her interest, he had answered
quietly, "Yes, when the owner was going through Paris last week, I found
he wanted the money, so--so the house is mine, though none of the legal
formalities have yet been complied with. I'm told that the old woman who
was caretaker there can make me comfortable enough for the few days I
can be away." He added in a different, a lower tone, "Ah! Peggy, if only
it were possible for us to go there together--how you would delight in
the place!"

"Would you like me to come with you? I will if you like, Laurence." She
had asked the question very simply--but Vanderlyn, looking at her
quickly, had seen that her hand was trembling, her eyes brimming with
tears. Then she had spoken gently, deliberately--seeming to plead with
herself, rather than with him, for a few days of such dual loneliness
for which all lovers long and which during their long years of intimacy
they had never once, even innocently, enjoyed. And he had grasped with
exultant gratitude--what man would have done otherwise?--at what she
herself came and offered him.

Walking up and down the solitary platform, Vanderlyn lived over again
each instant of that strange momentous conversation uttered four days
ago in the stately sunlit square which forms the heart of old Paris. How
the merry ghost of Marion Delorme, peeping out of one of the long narrow
casements of the corner house which was once hers, must have smiled to
hear this virtuous Englishwoman cast virtue to the light Parisian winds!

Vanderlyn also recalled, with almost the same surprise and discomfort as
he had experienced at the time itself, the way in which Margaret
Pargeter, so refined and so delicately bred, had discussed all the
material details connected with their coming adventure--details from
which the American diplomatist himself had shrunk, and which he would
have done almost anything to spare her.

"There is one person, and one alone," she had said with some decision,
"who must know. I must tell Adele de Lera--she must have my address, for
I cannot remain without news of my boy a whole week. As for Tom"--she
had flushed, and then gone on steadily--"Tom will believe that I am
going to stay with Adele at Marly-le-Roi, and my letters will be sent to
her house. Besides," she had added, "Tom himself is going away, to
England, for a fortnight."

To the man then walking by her side, and even now, as he was remembering
it all, the discussion was inexpressibly odious. "But do you think," he
had ventured to ask, "that Madame de Lera will consent? Remember, Peggy,
she is Catholic, and what is more, a pious Catholic."

"Of course she won't like it--of course she won't approve! But I'm
sure--in fact, Laurence, I _know_--that she will consent to forward my
letters. She understands that it would make no difference--that I should
think of some other plan for getting them. Should she refuse at the last
moment--but--but she will not refuse--" and her face--the fair,
delicately-moulded little face Vanderlyn loved--had become flooded with
colour.

For the first time since he had known her, he had realised that there
was a side to her character of which he was ignorant, and yet?--and yet
Laurence Vanderlyn knew Margaret Pargeter too well, his love of her
implied too intimate a knowledge, for him not to perceive that something
lay behind her secession from an ideal of conduct to which she had clung
so unswervingly and for such long years.

During the four days which had elapsed between then and now,--days of
agitation, of excitement, and of suspense,--he had more than once asked
himself whether it were possible that certain things which all the world
had long known concerning Tom Pargeter had only just become revealed to
Tom Pargeter's wife. He hoped, he trusted, this was not so; he had no
desire to owe her surrender to any ignoble longing for reprisal.

The world, especially that corner of Vanity Fair which takes a frankly
materialistic view of life and of life's responsibilities, is shrewder
than we generally credit, and the diplomatist's intimacy with the
Pargeter household had aroused but small comment in the strange polyglot
society in which lived, by choice, Tom Pargeter, the cosmopolitan
millionaire who was far more of a personage in Paris and in the French
sporting world than he could ever have hoped to be in England.

To all appearance Laurence Vanderlyn was as intimate with the husband as
with the wife, for he had tastes in common with them both, his interest
in sport and in horseflesh being a strong link with Tom Pargeter, while
his love of art, and his dilettante literary tastes, bound him to Peggy.
Also, and perhaps above all, he was an American--and Europeans cherish
strange and sometimes fond illusions as to your American's lack of
capacity for ordinary human emotion.

He alone knew that his tie with Mrs. Pargeter grew, if not more
passionate, then more absorbing and intimate as time went on, and he was
sometimes, even now, at considerable pains to put the busybodies of
their circle off the scent.

But indeed it would have required a very sharp, a very keen, human hound
to find the scent of what had been so singular and so innocent a tie.
Each had schooled the other to accept all that she would admit was
possible. True, Vanderlyn saw Margaret Pargeter almost every day, but
more often than not in the presence of acquaintances. She never came to
his rooms, and she had never seemed tempted to do any of the imprudent
things which many a woman, secure of her own virtue, will sometimes do
as if to prove the temper of her honour's blade.

So it was that Mrs. Pargeter had never fallen into the ranks of those
women who become the occasion for even good-natured gossip. The very way
in which they had, till to-night, conducted what she, the woman, was
pleased to call their friendship, made this which was now happening
seem, even now, to the man who was actually waiting for her to join him,
as unsubstantial, as likely to vanish, mirage-wise, as a dream.

And yet Vanderlyn passionately loved this woman whom most men would have
thought too cold to love, and who had known how to repress and tutor,
not only her own, but also his emotions. He loved her, too, so foolishly
and fondly that he had fashioned the whole of his life so that it should
be in harmony with hers, making sacrifices of which he had told her
nothing in order that he might surround her--an ill-mated, neglected
wife--with a wordless atmosphere of devotion which had become to her as
vital, as necessary, as is that of domestic peace and happiness to the
average woman. But for Laurence Vanderlyn and his "friendship," Mrs.
Pargeter's existence would have been lacking in all human savour, and
that from ironic circumstance rather than from any fault of her own.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vanderlyn had spent the day in a fever of emotion and suspense, and he
had arrived at the Gare de Lyon a good hour before the time the train
for Orange was due to leave.

At first he had wandered about the great railway-station aimlessly,
avoiding the platform whence he knew he and his companion were to start.
Then, with relief, he had hailed the moment for securing coming privacy
in the unreserved railway carriage; this had not been quite an easy
matter to compass, for he desired to avoid above all any appearance of
secrecy.

But he need not have felt any anxiety, for whereas in an English
railway-station his large "tip" to the guard, carrying with it
significant promise of final largesse, would have spelt but one thing,
and that thing love, the French railway employe accepted without
question the information that the lady the foreign gentleman was
expecting was his sister. Such a statement to the English mind would
have suggested the hero of an innocent elopement, but as regards family
relations the French are curiously Eastern, and then it may be said
again that the American's stern, pre-occupied face and cold manner were
not those which to a Parisian could suggest a happy lover.

As he walked up and down with long, even strides, his arms laden with
papers and novels, it would have been difficult for anyone seeing him
there to suppose that Vanderlyn was starting on anything but a solitary
journey. Indeed, for the moment he felt horribly alone. He began to
experience the need of human companionship. She had said she would be
there at seven; it was now a quarter-past the hour. In ten minutes the
train would be gone----

Then came to him a thought which made him unconsciously clench his
hands. Was it not possible, nay, even likely, that Margaret Pargeter,
like many another woman before her, had found her courage fail her at
the last moment--that Heaven, stooping to her feeble virtue, had come to
save her in spite of herself?

Vanderlyn's steps unconsciously quickened. They bore him on and on, to
the extreme end of the platform. He stood there a moment staring out
into the red-starred darkness: how could he have ever thought that
Margaret Pargeter--his timid, scrupulous little Peggy--would embark on
so high and dangerous an adventure?

There had been a moment, during that springtime of passion which returns
no more, when Vanderlyn had for a wild instant hoped that he would be
able to take her away from the life in which he had felt her to be
playing the terrible role of an innocent and yet degraded victim.

Even to an old-fashioned American the word divorce does not carry with
it the odious significance it bears to the most careless Englishwoman.
He had envisaged a short scandal, and then his and Peggy's marriage. But
he had been compelled, almost at once, to recognise that with her any
such solution was impossible.

As to another alternative? True, there are women--he and Margaret
Pargeter had known many such--who regard what they call love as a
legitimate distraction; to them the ignoble, often sordid, shifts
involved in the pursuit of a secret intrigue are as the salt of life;
but this solution of their tragic problem would have been--or so
Vanderlyn would have sworn till four days ago--impossible to the woman
he loved, and this had added one more stone to the pedestal on which she
had been placed by him from the day they had first met.

And yet? Yet so inconsequent and so illogical is our poor human nature,
that she, the virtuous woman, had completely lacked the courage to break
with the man who loved her, even in those, the early friable days of
their passion. Nay more, whatever Peggy might believe, Vanderlyn was
well aware that the good, knowing all, would have called them wicked,
even if the wicked, equally well-informed, would have sneered at them as
absurdly good.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vanderlyn wheeled abruptly round. He looked at the huge station clock,
and began walking quickly back, down the now peopled platform to the
ticket barrier. As he did so his eyes and mind, trained to note all that
was happening round him, together with an unconscious longing to escape
from the one absorbing thought, made him focus those of his
fellow-travellers who stood about him. They consisted for the most part
of provincial men of business, and of young officers in uniform, each
and all eager to prolong to the uttermost their golden moments in Paris;
more than one was engaged in taking an affectionate, deeply sentimental
farewell from a feminine companion who bore about her those significant
signs--the terribly pathetic, battered air of wear and tear--which set
apart, in our sane workaday world, the human plaything.

The sight of these leave-takings made the American's face flush darkly;
it was hateful to him to think that Mrs. Pargeter must suffer, even for
a few moments, the proximity of such women--of such men. He felt a
violent shrinking from the thought that any one of these gay, careless
young Frenchmen might conceivably know Peggy--if only by sight--as the
charming, "elegant" wife of Tom Pargeter, the well-known sportsman who
had done France the signal honour of establishing his racing stable at
Chantilly instead of at Newmarket! The thought that such an encounter
was within the bounds of possibility made Vanderlyn for a moment almost
hope that the woman for whom he was waiting would not come after all.

He cursed himself for a fool. Why had he not thought of driving her out
to one of the smaller stations on the line whence they could have
started, if not unseen, then unobserved?

But soon the slowly-growing suspicion that she, after all, was perhaps
not coming to-night, brought with it an agonising pang. Very suddenly
there occurred to him the horrible possibility of material accident.
Mrs. Pargeter was not used even to innocent adventure; she lived the
guarded, sheltered existence which belongs of right to those women whose
material good fortune all their less fortunate sisters envy. The dangers
of the Paris streets rose up before Vanderlyn's excited imagination,
hideous, formidable....

Then, quite suddenly, Margaret Pargeter herself stood before him,
smiling a little tremulously.

She was wearing a grey, rather austere tailor-made gown; it gave a
girlish turn to her slender figure, and on her fair hair was poised the
little boat-shaped hat and long silvery gauze veil which have become in
a sense the uniform of a well-dressed Parisienne on her travels.

As he looked at her, standing there by his side, Vanderlyn realised how
instinctively tender, how passionately protective, was his love for her;
and again there came over him the doubt, the questioning, as to why she
was doing this....

"Messieurs, mesdames, en voiture, s'il vous plait! En voiture, s'il vous
plait!"

He put his hand on her shoulder--her head was very little higher than
his heart--and guided her to the railway carriage which had been kept
for them.




II.


And now Laurence Vanderlyn and Margaret Pargeter were speeding through
the night, completely and physically alone as they had never been during
the years of their long acquaintanceship; and, as he sat there, with the
woman he had loved so long and so faithfully wholly in his power, there
came over Vanderlyn a sense of fierce triumph and conquest.

The train had not started to time. There had come a sound of eager
talking on the platform, and Vanderlyn, filled with a vague
apprehension, had leaned out of the window and with some difficulty
ascertained the cause of the delay. The guard in charge of the train,
the man, that is, whom he had feed so well in order to secure privacy,
had strained his hand in lifting a weight, and another employe had had
to take his place.

But at last the few moments of waiting--to Vanderlyn they had seemed an
hour--had come to an end. At last the train began to move, that slow and
yet relentless movement which is one of the few things in our modern
world which spell finality. To the man and the woman it was the starting
of the train which indicated to them both that the die was indeed cast.

Vanderlyn looked at his companion. She was gazing up at him with a
strange expression of gladness, of relief, on her face. The long years
of restraint and measured coldness seemed to have vanished, receded into
nothingness.

She held out her ringless hand and clasped his, and a moment later they
were sitting hand in hand, like two children, side by side. With a
rather awkward movement he slipped on her finger a thin gold ring--his
dead mother's wedding-ring,--but still she said nothing. Her head was
turned away, and she was staring out of the window, as if fascinated by
the flying lights. He knew rather than saw that her eyes were shining,
her cheeks pink with excitement; then she took off her hat, and he told
himself that her fair hair gleaming against the grey-brown furnishings
of the railway carriage looked like a golden aureole.

Suddenly Laurence Vanderlyn pressed the hand he was holding to his lips,
dropped it, and then stood up. He pulled the blue silk shade over the
electric light globe which hung in the centre of the carriage; glanced
through one of the two tiny glazed apertures giving a view of the next
compartment; then he sat down by her, and in the half darkness gathered
her into his arms.

"Dear," he said, in a voice that sounded strange and muffled even to
himself, "do you remember the passage at Bonnington?"

As he held her, she had been looking up into his face, but now, hearing
his question, she flushed deeply, and her head fell forward on his
breast. Their minds, their hearts, were travelling back to the moment,
to the trifling episode, which had revealed to each the other's love.

It had happened ten years ago, at a time when Tom Pargeter, desiring to
play the role of country gentleman, had taken for awhile a certain
historic country house. There, he and his young wife had brought
together a great Christmas house-party composed of the odd, ill-assorted
social elements which gather at the call of the wealthy host who has
exchanged old friends for new acquaintances. Peggy's own people,
old-fashioned country gentry, were regarded by Pargeter as hopelessly
dowdy and "out of it," so none of them had been invited. With Laurence
Vanderlyn alone had the young mistress of the house had any link of
mutual interests or sympathies; but of flirtation, as that protean word
was understood by those about them, there had been none.

Then, on Christmas Eve, had come the playing of childish games, though
no children were present, for the two-year-old child of the host and
hostess was safe in bed. It was in the chances of one of these games
that Laurence Vanderlyn had for a moment caught Margaret Pargeter in his
arms----

He had released her almost at once, but not before they had exchanged
the long probing look which had told to each their own as well as the
other's secret. Till that moment they had been strangers--from that
moment they were lovers, but lovers allowing themselves none of love's
license, and very soon Vanderlyn had taught himself to be content with
all that Peggy's conscience allowed her to think possible.

She had never known--how could she have known?--what his acquiescence
had cost him. Now and again, during the long years, they had been
compelled to discuss the abnormal relation which Peggy called their
friendship; together they had trembled at the fragile basis on which
what most human beings would have considered their meagre happiness was
founded.

More than once she had touched him to the heart by asserting that she
felt sure that the inscrutable Providence in which she had retained an
almost childish faith, could never be so cruel as to deprive her of the
only source of happiness, apart from her little son, which had come her
way; and so, although their intimacy had become closer, the links which
bound them not only remained platonic, but, as is the way with such
links, tended to become more platonic as the time went on.

Even now, as he sat there with the woman he loved wholly in his power,
lying in his arms with her face pressed to his breast, Vanderlyn's mind
was in a maze of doubt as to what was to be their relationship during
the coming days. Even now he was not sure as to what Peggy had meant
when she had seemed to plead, more with herself than with him, for a
short space of such happiness as during their long intimacy they had
never enjoyed.

All his acquaintances, including his official chief, would have told you
that Laurence Vanderlyn was an accomplished man of the world, and an
acute student of human nature, but now, to-night, he owned himself at
fault. Only one thing was quite clear; he told himself that the thought
of again taking up the thread of what had been so unnatural an existence
was hateful--impossible.

Perhaps the woman felt the man's obscure moment of recoil; she gently
withdrew herself from his arms. "I'm tired," she said, rather
plaintively, "the train sways so, Laurence. I wonder if I could lie
down----"

He heaped up the cushions, spread out the large rug, which he had
purchased that day, and which formed their only luggage, for everything
else, by her wish, had been sent on the day before.

Very tenderly he wrapped the folds of the rug round her. Then he knelt
by her side; and at once she put out her arms, and pulled his head down
close to hers; a moment later her soft lips were laid against his cheek.
He remembered, with a retrospective pang, the ache at his heart with
which the sight of her caresses to her child had always filled him.

"Peggy," he whispered, "tell me, my beloved, why are you being so good
to me--now?"

She made no direct answer to the question. Instead, she moved away a
little, and raised herself on her elbow; her blue eyes, filled with a
strange solemnity, rested on his moved face.

"Listen," she said, "I want to tell you something, Laurence. I want you
to know that I understand how--how angelic you have been to me all these
years. Ever since we first knew one another, you have given me
everything--everything in exchange for nothing."

And as he shook his head, she continued, "Yes, for nothing! For a long
time I tried to persuade myself that this was not so--I tried to believe
that you were as contented as I had taught myself to be. I first
realised what a hindrance"--she hesitated for a moment, and then said
the two words--"our friendship--must have proved to you four years
ago,--when you might have gone to St. Petersburg."

As Vanderlyn allowed an exclamation of surprise to escape him, she went
on, "Yes, Laurence, you have never known that I knew of that chance--of
that offer. Adele de Lera heard of it, and told me; she begged me then,
oh! so earnestly, to give you up--to let you go."

"It was no business of hers," he muttered, "I never thought for a moment
of accepting----"

"--But you would have done so if you had never known me, if we had not
been friends?" She looked up at him, hoping, longing, for a quick word
of denial.

But Vanderlyn said no such word. Instead, he fell manlike into the trap
she had perhaps unwittingly laid for him.

"If I had never known you?" he repeated, "why, Peggy--dearest--my whole
life would have been different if I had never known you! Do you really
think that I should have been here in Paris, doing what I am now
doing--or rather doing nothing--if we had never met?"

The honest, unmeditated answer made her wince, but she went on, as if
she had not heard it--

"As you know, I did not take Adele's advice, but I have never forgotten,
Laurence, some of the things she said."

A look which crossed his face caused her to redden, and add hastily,
"She's not given to speaking of you--of us; indeed she's not! She never
again alluded to the matter; but the other day when I was persuading
her,--she required a good deal of persuasion, Laurence--to consent to my
plan, I reminded her of all she had said four years ago."

"And what was it that she did say four years ago?" asked Vanderlyn with
a touch of angry curiosity; "as Madame de Lera is a Frenchwoman, and a
pious Catholic, I presume she tried to make you believe that our
friendship was wrong, and could only lead to one thing----" he stopped
abruptly.

"No," said Peggy, quietly, "she did not think then that our friendship
would lead to--to this; she thought in some ways better of me than I
deserve. But she did tell me that I was taking a great responsibility
on myself, and that if anything happened--for instance, if I
died----" Vanderlyn again made a restless, almost a contemptuous
movement--"I should have been the cause of your wasting the best years of
your life; I should have broken and spoilt your career, and all--all for
nothing."

"Nothing?" exclaimed Vanderlyn passionately. "Ah! Peggy, do not say
that. You know, you must know, that our love--I will not call it
friendship," he went on resolutely, "for this one week let no such false
word be uttered between us--you must know, I say, that our love has been
everything to me! Till I met you, my life was empty, miserable; since I
met you it has been filled, satisfied, and that even if I have received
what Madame de Lera dares to call--nothing!"

He spoke with a fervour, a conviction, which to the woman over whom he
was now leaning brought exquisite solace. At last he was speaking as she
had longed to hear him speak.

"You don't know," she whispered brokenly, "how happy you make me by
saying this to-night, Laurence. I have sometimes wondered lately if you
cared for me as much as you used to care?"

Vanderlyn's dark face contracted with pain; he was no Don Juan, learned
in the byways of a woman's heart. Then, almost roughly, he caught her to
him, and she, looking up, saw a strange glowing look come over his
face--a look which was, even to her, an all-sufficing answer, for it
told of the baffled longing, of the abnegation, and, even now, of the
restraint and selflessness, of the man who loved her.

"Did you really think that, Peggy?" was all he said; then, more slowly,
as the arms about her relaxed their hold, "Why, my dear, you've always
been--you are--my life."

A sudden sob, a cry of joy broke from her. She sat up, and with a quick
passionate movement flung herself on his breast; slowly she raised her
face to his: "I love you," she whispered, "Laurence, I love you!"

His lips trembled for a moment on her closed eyelids, then sought and
found her soft, quivering mouth. But even then Vanderlyn's love was
reverent, restrained in its expression, yet none the less, perhaps the
more, a binding sacrament.

At last, "Why did you subject us," he said, huskily, "to such an ordeal?
What has made you give way--now? How can you dream of going back, after
a week, to our old life?" But even as he asked the searching questions,
he laid her back gently on her improvised couch.

Woman-like she did not give him a direct response, then, quite suddenly,
she yielded him the key to the mystery.

"Because, Laurence, the last time I was in England, something happened
which altered my outlook on life."

She uttered the words with strange solemnity, but Vanderlyn's ears were
holden; true, he heard her answer to his question, but the word conveyed
little or nothing to him.

He was still riding the whirlwind of his own poignant emotion; he was
telling himself, with voiceless and yet most binding oaths, that never,
never should the woman whose heart had just beaten against his heart,
whose lips had just trembled beneath his lips, go back to act the part
of even the nominal wife to Tom Pargeter. He would consent to any
condition imposed by her, as long as they could be together; surely even
she would understand, if not now, then later, that there are certain
moments which can never be obliterated or treated as if they have not
been....

It was with difficulty--with a feeling that he was falling from high
heaven to earth--that he forced himself to listen to her next words.

"As you know, I stayed, when in England, with Sophy Pargeter----"

Again she looked up at him, as if hesitating what she should say.

"Sophy Pargeter?" he repeated the name mechanically, but with a sudden
wincing.

Vanderlyn had always disliked, with a rather absurd, unreasoning
dislike, Peggy's plain-featured, rough-tongued sister-in-law. To him
Sophy Pargeter had ever been a grotesque example of the deep--they
almost appear racial--differences which may, and so often do, exist
between different members of a family whose material prosperity is due
to successful commerce.

The vast inherited wealth which had made of Tom Pargeter a selfish,
pleasure-loving, unmoral human being, had transformed his sister Sophy
into a woman oppressed by the belief that it was her duty to spend the
greater part of her considerable income in what she believed to be good
works. She regarded with grim disapproval her brother's way of life, and
she condemned even his innocent pleasures; she had, however, always been
fond of Peggy. Laurence Vanderlyn, himself the outcome and product of an
old Puritan New England and Dutch stock, was well aware of the horror
and amazement with which Miss Pargeter would regard Peggy's present
action.

"Well, Laurence, the day that I arrived there, I mean at Sophy's
house, I felt very ill. I suppose the journey had tired me, for I
fainted----" Again she hesitated, as if not knowing how to frame her
next sentence.

"Sophy was horribly frightened. She would send for her doctor, and
though he said there was nothing much the matter with me, he insisted
that I ought to see another man--a specialist."

Peggy looked up with an anxious expression in her blue eyes--but again
Vanderlyn's ears and eyes were holden. He habitually felt for the
medical profession the unreasoning dislike, almost the contempt, your
perfectly healthy human being, living in an ailing world, often--in fact
almost always--does feel for those who play the role of the old augurs
in our modern life. Mrs. Pargeter had never been a strong woman; she was
often ill, often in the doctor's hands. So it was that Vanderlyn did not
realise the deep import of her next words----

"Sophy went with me to London--she was really very kind about it all,
and you would have liked her better, Laurence, if you had seen her that
day. The specialist did all the usual things, then he told me to go on
much as I had been doing, and to avoid any sudden shock or
excitement--in fact he said almost exactly what that dear old French
doctor said to me a year ago----"

She waited a moment: "Then, Laurence, the next day, when Sophy thought I
had got over the journey to London," Peggy smiled at him a little
whimsical smile, "she told me that she thought I ought to know--it was
her duty to tell me--that I had heart disease, and that, though I should
probably live a long time, it was possible I might die at any
moment----"

A sudden wrath filled the dark, sensitive face of the man bending over
her.

"What nonsense!" he exclaimed with angry decision. "What will the
doctors say next, I wonder! I wish to God you would make up your mind,
Peggy, once and for all, never to see a doctor again! I beg of you, if
only for my sake, to promise me that you will not go again to any doctor
till I give you permission to do so. You don't know what I went through
five years ago when one of those charlatans declared that he would not
answer for the consequences if you didn't winter South, and--and Tom
would not let you go!"

He paused, and then added more gently, "And yet nothing happened--you
were none the worse for spending that winter in cold Leicestershire!"

"Yes, that's true," she answered submissively, "I will make you the
promise you ask, Laurence. I daresay I have been foolish in going so
often to doctors; I don't know that they have ever done me much good."

His eyes, having now become quite accustomed to the dim light, suddenly
seemed to see in her face a slight change; a look of fatigue and
depression had crept over her mouth. He told himself with a pang that
after all she was a delicate, fragile human being--or was it the blue
shade which threw a strange pallor on the face he was scrutinising with
such deep, wistful tenderness?

He bent over her and tucked the rug round her feet.

"Turn round and try to go to sleep," he whispered. "It's a long, long
journey by this train. I'll wake you in good time before we get to
Dorgival."

She turned, as he told her, obediently, and then, acting on a sudden
impulse, she pulled him down once more to her, and kissed him as a child
might have done. "Good night," he said, "good night, my
love--'enchanting, noble little Peggy!'"

A smile lit up her face radiantly. It was a long, long time since
Vanderlyn had last uttered the charming lines first quoted by him very
early in their acquaintance, when he had seen her among her own people,
one of a band of joyous English boys and girls celebrating a family
festival--the golden wedding of her grandparents. Peggy had been
delicately, deliciously kind to the shy, proud American youth, whom an
introduction from valued friends had suddenly made free of an English
family clan.

That had been a year before her marriage to Tom Pargeter, the inheritor
of a patent dye process which had made him master of one of those
fantastic fortunes which impress the imagination of even the
unimaginative. That the young millionaire should deign to throw the
matrimonial handkerchief at their little Peggy had seemed to her family
a piece of magic good fortune. She could bring him good old blood, and
certain great social connections, in exchange for limitless wealth; it
had been regarded as an ideal marriage.

More than four years went by before Vanderlyn again saw Peggy, and then
he had found her changed--transformed from a merry, light-hearted girl
into a pensive, reserved woman. During the interval he had often thought
of her as one thinks of a delightful playfellow, but he only came to
love her after their second meeting--when he had seen, at first with
honest dismay, and then with shame-faced gladness, how utterly ill-mated
she and Tom Pargeter were the one to the other.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vanderlyn made his way over to the other side of the railway carriage;
there he sat down, and, crossing his arms on his breast, after a very
few moments he fell into a deep, dreamless sleep.




III.


Vanderlyn woke with a start. He looked round, bewildered for a moment.
Then his brain cleared, and he felt vexed with himself, a little ashamed
of having slept. It seemed to him that he had been asleep hours. How
odious it would have been if at the first stopping place of the
demi-rapide some stranger had entered the railway carriage! Instead of
sleeping, he ought to have remained watching over that still figure
which lay so quietly resting on the other side of the carriage.

He stood up. How tired he felt, how strangely depressed and uneasy! But
that, after all, was natural, for his last four nights had been wakeful,
his last four days full of anxiety and suspense.

He turned and looked out of the window, wondering where they were, how
far they had gone; the train was travelling very quickly, he could see
white tree-trunks rushing past him in the moonlight.

Then Vanderlyn took out his watch. Surely it must be later than nine
o'clock? He moved from the window and held the dial close under the blue
silk shade of the lamp. Why, it was only three minutes to nine! Then
they hadn't yet passed Dorgival; in fact they wouldn't be there for
another twenty minutes, for this train took two hours to do what the
quick expresses accomplished in an hour and a quarter.

It was good to know that he had only slept for quite a little while. The
desire for sleep had now left him completely, and he began to feel
excited, restless, and intensely, glowingly alive....

The curious depression and unease which had possessed him a few moments
ago lifted from his soul; the future was once more full of infinite
possibilities.

His darling little Peggy! What strange beings women were! With what
self-contempt, with what scorpions would he have lashed himself, had he
been the one to evolve this plan of this furtive flight, to be followed
at the end of a week by a return to the life to which he now looked back
with shame as well as distaste! And yet she, the woman he loved, had
evolved it, and thought out every detail of the scheme--before telling
him of what was in her mind...

As to the future? Vanderlyn threw back his head; nay, nay, there could
be no going back to what had been. Even Peggy would see that. She had
herself broken down the barrier erected with such care; and soon, very
soon she would--she must--see that such breaches can never be repaired
or treated as if they had not been made. What had happened, what was
happening, to-night, was, in very truth the beginning, for them both, of
a new life.

So Laurence Vanderlyn swore to himself, taking many silent vows of
chivalrous devotion to the woman who, for love of him, had broken, not
only with life-long traditions of honour, but also with a conscience he
had known to be so delicately scrupulous.

       *       *       *       *       *

From where he was standing in the middle of the swaying carriage,
something in the way in which his sleeping companion's head was lying
suddenly aroused Vanderlyn's quick, keen attention. Putting out a hand
to steady himself against the back of the compartment, he bent
down--indifferent to the risk of rousing the still figure.

Then, with a rapid movement, he straightened himself; his face had gone
grey--expressionless. He pushed back the blue shade off the globe of
light, careless of the bright rays which suddenly illumined every corner
of the railway carriage....

With an instinctive gesture, Vanderlyn covered his eyes and shut out the
blinding light. He pressed his fingers on his eyeballs; every fibre of
his body, every quivering nerve was in revolt: for he realised, even
then, that there was no room for hope, for doubt,--he knew that what he
had looked upon in the dim light was death.

With an awful pang he now understood why Peggy had made him that strange
pathetic offer. How blind he had been! The English doctor, the man on
whom he had poured such careless scorn, had been right,--terribly right.

At last he uncovered his eyes, and forced himself to gaze upon what lay
before him----

Margaret Pargeter had died in her sleep. She was lying exactly as
Vanderlyn had left her, still folded closely in the rug he had placed so
tenderly about her. But a terrible change had come over the delicate
features--the sightless eyes were wide open, the lips had fallen apart;
his glance, travelling down, saw that her left hand, the hand where
gleamed his mother's wedding ring, was slightly clenched.

Again Vanderlyn passed his hand over his eyes. He stared about him with
a touch of helpless bewilderment, but he could do nothing, even if there
had been anything to do; it was she who had insisted that they should be
unencumbered by any luggage.

He crouched down, and, with an involuntary inward shrinking, took up the
chilly, heavy hand and tried to warm it against his cheek; then he
shivered, his teeth chattered, with a groan of which the sound echoed
strangely in his ears he hid his face in the folds of her grey cloth
gown----For a few moments the extent of his calamity blotted out
everything.

And then, as Vanderlyn lay there, there suddenly opened before him a way
of escape from his intolerable agony and sense of loss, and he welcomed
it with eager relief. He raised his head, and began to think intently.
How inexplicable that he had not thought of this--the only way--at once!
It was so simple and so easy; he saw himself flinging wide open the
narrow carriage door, and then, with that still figure clasped in his
arms, stepping out into the rushing darkness....

His mind was now working with incredible quickness and clearness. How
good it was to know that here, in France, there need be--there would
be--no public scandal! In England or America the supposed suicide of two
such people as were Margaret Pargeter and himself could not hope to be
concealed; not so in France.

Here, as Vanderlyn knew well, there was every chance that such a love
tragedy as the one of which he and Mrs. Pargeter would be supposed to
have been hero and heroine, would remain hidden--hidden, that is, from
everyone except those closely connected with her and with himself. His
own chief, the American Ambassador, would be informed of what had
happened, but he was a wise old man, there was no fear of indiscretion
in that quarter; but--yes, he, Vanderlyn, must face that fact--Tom
Pargeter would know the truth.

Vanderlyn's hidden abhorrence of _the other man_,--of the man whose
friend he had perforce compelled himself to be for so long, rose in a
great flood.

Tom Pargeter? The selfish, mean-souled, dull-witted human being, whose
huge fortune, coupled with the masculine virtues of physical courage and
straightness in matters of sport, made him not only popular but in a
small way a personage! Pargeter, no doubt, would suffer, especially in
his self-esteem; on the other hand, he, the husband, would feel that so
had his own conduct, his coarse infidelity, his careless neglect of his
wife, been fully condoned.

With a choking feeling of sharp pain, Vanderlyn suddenly remembered that
what Tom Pargeter knew now, poor Peggy's son would some day have to
know. For awhile, no doubt, the boy would be kept in merciful ignorance
of the tragedy, but then, when the lad was growing into manhood, some
blundering fool, or more likely some well-intentioned woman, probably
his aunt, Sophy Pargeter, would feel it her duty to smirch for him his
mother's memory....

Nay, that could not, that must never, be! Vanderlyn's head fell forward
on his breast; there came back, wrapping him as in a shroud, the awful
feeling of desolation, of life-long loss,--for he now knew, with
inexorable knowledge, what the future held for him.

It must be his fate to live, not die; he must live in order to safeguard
the honour of Margaret Pargeter, the beloved woman who had trusted him
wholly, not only in this, which was to have been their supreme
adventure, but during the whole of their long, almost wordless love. It
was for her sake that, she dead, he must go on living; for her sake he
must make what now, at this moment, seemed to be a sacrifice almost
beyond his power, for reason told him that he must leave her, and as
soon as possible, lying there dead--alone.

With tender, absent fingers he smoothed out the woollen folds to which
his face had been pressed; he slipped from her finger the thin gold
ring, and placed it once more where he had always worn it from the day
of his mother's death till an hour ago.

Then he stood up, and turned deliberately away.

There came the loud wailing whistle which told that the train was
nearing a station. He leaned out of the window; the lights of a town
were flashing past, and he grimly told himself that there was no time to
lose.

Vanderlyn again bent down; the instinctive repugnance of the living for
the dead suddenly left him. His darling little Peggy! How could he bear
to leave her there--alone? If he and she had been what they ought to
have been--husband and wife--even then, he felt that never would he have
left her to the neglect, to the forgetfulness to which other men leave
their beloved dead. There rose before him the memory of one of the most
moving of the world's great pictures, Goya's painting of mad Queen Joan
bearing about with her the unburied body of Philip.

He turned that which had been Margaret Pargeter so that her face would
be completely hidden from anyone opening the door and looking into the
carriage.

Yet, even as he was doing this, Vanderlyn kept a sharp watch and ward
over his own nerves. His had now become the mental attitude of a man who
desires to save the living woman whom he loves from some great physical
danger. Blessing his own foresight in providing the large rug which he
had folded about her so tenderly an hour ago, he pulled up a fold of it
till it covered, and completely concealed, her head. Should a traveller
now enter the carriage he would see nothing but a woman apparently
plunged in deep slumber.

Again Vanderlyn glanced, with far more scrutinising eyes than he had
done when first entering the train, through the two glazed apertures
which commanded a view of the next carriage; it was, as he knew well,
empty.

He turned once more the silk shade over the lamp, jammed his hat down
over his eyes, set his lips together, and, averting his eyes from what
he was leaving, opened the railway carriage door....

The train was slowing down; a few hundred yards ahead lay the station.
Vanderlyn stepped to one side of the footboard, and waited till the door
through which he had just passed swung to; then he turned the handle,
securing it firmly.

With soft, swift steps, he walked past the window of the now darkened
carriage and slipped into the next empty, brightly-lighted compartment.
There came over him a strong temptation to look through the little
apertures giving into the darkened carriage he had just left, but it was
a temptation which he resisted. Instead, he leant out of the window, as
does a traveller who is nearing his destination.

Soon there floated up to him the shouting of "Dorgival! Cinq minutes
d'arret!" and when the train at last stopped, there arose the joyous
chatter which attends every arrival in a French station.

Vanderlyn waited for a few moments; then he stepped down from the
carriage, and began walking quietly down the platform. With intense
relief he remembered that the guard of the train whom he had feed so
well, and who must have noticed him with Peggy, had been left behind in
Paris.

Having passed the end compartment and guard's van he stood for awhile
staring down at the permanent way, counting the rails which gleamed in
the half darkness. He measured with his eyes the distance which
separated the platform on which he was standing from that whence the
next train back to Paris must start.

There was very little risk either of accident or detection, but it was
his duty to minimise whatever risk there was. He dropped down gently
onto the permanent way, and stood for a moment in the deep shadow cast
by the rear of the train he had just left; then, cautiously advancing,
he looked both up and down the line, and made his way to the other side.

The platform on which he now found himself was deserted, for the whole
life of the station was still centred round the train which had just
arrived; but as he started across the rails Vanderlyn became possessed
with a feeling of acute, almost intolerable, suspense. He longed with a
feverish longing to see the demi-rapide glide out into the darkness. He
told himself he had been a fool to suppose that anyone could enter the
darkened carriage where the dead woman lay without at once discovering
the truth,--and he began asking himself what he would do were the awful
discovery made, and were the fact that he had been her travelling
companion suddenly revealed or suspected.

But Laurence Vanderlyn was not subjected to so dread an ordeal; at last
there floated to where he was standing the welcome cry of "En voiture!
En voiture, s'il vous plait!" The dark serpentine mass on which the
lonely man's eyes were fixed shivered as though it were a sentient being
waking to life, and slowly the train began to move.

Vanderlyn started walking up the platform, and for awhile he kept in
step with the slowly gliding carriages; then they swept by more quickly,
a swift procession of gleaming lights....

As at last the red disc melted into the night, he gave a muffled groan
of anguish, for mingling with his sense of intense relief, came that of
eternal, irreparable loss.

Ironic fortune was kind to Vanderlyn that night; his return ticket from
far-away Orange, though only issued in Paris some two hours before, was
allowed to pass unchallenged; and a couple of francs bestowed on a
communicative employe drew the welcome news that a southern express
bound for Paris was about to stop at Dorgival.




IV.


It was only eleven o'clock when Vanderlyn found himself once more in the
Gare de Lyon. He walked quickly out of the great station which was
henceforth to hold for him such intimately tender and poignant memories;
and then, instead of taking a cab, he made his way on foot down to the
lonely Seine-side quays.

There, leaning over and staring down into the swift black waters of the
river, he planned out his drab immediate future.

In one sense the way was clear before him,--he must of course go on
exactly as before; show himself, that is, in his usual haunts; take the
moderate part he had hitherto taken in what he felt to be the dreary
round of so-called pleasures with which Paris was now seething. That
must be his task--his easy and yet intolerable task--during the next
week or ten days, until the disappearance of Margaret Pargeter became
first suspected, and then discovered.

But before that was likely to happen many long days would certainly go
by, for,--as is so often the case when a man and woman have become, in
secret, everything to one another, Laurence Vanderlyn and Mrs. Pargeter
had gradually detached themselves from all those whom they had once
called their friends, and even Peggy had had no intimate who would miss
a daily, or even a weekly, letter.

Indeed, it was just possible, so Vanderlyn, resting his arms on the
stone parapet, now told himself, that the first part of his ordeal might
last as long as a fortnight, that is, till Tom Pargeter came back from
England.

There was of course yet another possibility; it was conceivable that
everything would not fall out as they, or rather Peggy, had imagined.
Pargeter, for instance, might return sooner; and, if he did so, he would
certainly require his wife's immediate presence in Paris, for the
millionaire was one of those men who hate to be alone even in their
spare moments. Also more than his wife's company, Pargeter valued her
presence as part of what the French so excellently style the _decor_ of
his life; she was his thing, for which he had paid a good price; some of
his friends, the sycophants with which he loved to be surrounded, would
have said that he had paid for her very dearly.

It was very unlikely, however, that Tom Pargeter would return to Paris
before he was expected to do so. For many years past he had spent the
first fortnight of each May at Newmarket; and, as is the curious custom
of his kind, he seldom varied the order of his rather monotonous
pleasures.

But stay--Vanderlyn suddenly remembered Madame de Lera, that is the one
human being who had been in Peggy's confidence. She was a real and
terrible point of danger--or rather she might at any moment become so.
It was with her, at the de Lera villa in the little village of
Marly-le-Roi, that Mrs. Pargeter was, even now, supposed to be staying.
This being so, he, Vanderlyn, must make it his business to see Madame de
Lera at the first possible moment. Together they would have to concoct
some kind of possible story--he shuddered with repugnance at the
thought.

Long before Peggy's confidences in the train, the American diplomatist
had been well aware that Adele de Lera disapproved of his close
friendship with Mrs. Pargeter; and she had never lent herself to any of
those innocent complicities with which even good women are often so
ready to help those of their friends who are most foolish--whom perhaps
they know to be more tempted--than themselves.

The one thing of paramount importance, so Vanderlyn suddenly reminded
himself, was that no one--not even Madame de Lera--should ever know that
he and Margaret Pargeter had left Paris that night, together. How could
this fact be best concealed, and concealed for ever?

To the unspoken question came swift answer. It flashed on the man
lingering on the solitary river-side quay, that even now, to-night, it
was not too late for him to establish the most effectual of alibis. By
taking a fiacre and bribing the man to drive quickly he could be back in
his rooms in the Rue de Rivoli, dressed, and at his club, before
midnight. Fool that he was to have wasted even a quarter of an hour!

Vanderlyn struck sharply across the dimly-lighted thoroughfare; he
started walking down one of the narrow streets which connect the river
quays with commercial Paris. A few moments later, having picked up a
cab, he was driving rapidly westward, down the broad, still seething
Boulevard du Temple, and, as he suddenly became aware with a sharp pang
at his heart, past the entrance to the quiet mediaeval square, where,
only four short days ago, he and Peggy walking side by side, had held
the conversation which was to prove pregnant of so much short-lived joy,
and of such long-lived pain.

Like so many modern Americans, to whom every material manifestation of
wealth has become distasteful, Laurence Vanderlyn had chosen to pitch
his Paris tent on the top floor of one of those eighteenth-century
houses which, if lacking such conveniences as electric light and lifts,
can command in their place the stately charm and spaciousness of which
the modern Parisian architect seems to have lost the secret. His
_appartement_ consisted of a few large, airy, low-pitched rooms, of
which the stone balconies overlooked the Tuileries gardens, while from a
corner window of his sitting-room Vanderlyn could obtain what was in
very truth a bird's-eye view of the vast Place de la Concorde.

Very soon after his arrival in Paris the diplomatist had the good
fortune to come across a couple of French servants, a husband and wife,
who exactly suited his simple and yet fastidious requirements. They were
honest, thrifty, clean, and their only fault--that of chattering to one
another like magpies--was to Vanderlyn an agreeable proof that they led
a life quite independent of his own. Never had he been more glad to know
that this was so than to-night, for they greeted his return home with
the easy indifference, and real pleasure, very unlike the surface
respect and ill-concealed resentment with which a master's unexpected
appearance would have been received by a couple of more cosmopolitan
servitors.

With nerves strung up to their highest tension, forcing himself only to
think of the present, Vanderlyn put on his evening clothes. It was still
wanting some minutes to midnight when he left the Rue de Rivoli for the
Boulevard de la Madeleine. A few moments later he was at the door of the
club where he was sure of finding, even at this time of night, plenty of
friends and acquaintances who would be able to testify, in the very
unlikely event of its being desirable that they should do so, to the
fact that he had been there that evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

L'Union is the most interesting, as it is in a certain sense the most
exclusive, of Paris clubs. Founded in memory of the hospitality shown by
the English gentry to the French emigrees, during the Revolution, this,
the most old-fashioned of Paris clubs, impales the Royal arms of France,
that is, the old fleur-de-lys, with those of England.

At all times L'Union has been in a special sense a resort of
diplomatists, and Vanderlyn spent there a great deal of his spare time.
The American was popular among his French fellow-members, to whom his
excellent French and his unobtrusive good breeding made him an agreeable
companion. There could have been no greater proof of how he was regarded
there than the fact that, thanks to his efforts, Tom Pargeter had been
elected to the club. True, the millionaire-sportsman did not often
darken the threshold of the stately old club-house, but he was none the
less exceedingly proud of his membership of L'Union, for it gave him an
added standing in the cosmopolitan world in which he had early elected
to spend his life. Perhaps it was fortunate that he had so little use
for a club where gambling games are not allowed to be played--where,
indeed, as the younger members are apt to complain, dominoes take the
place of baccarat!

The tall Irish footman whose special duty it was to wait on the foreign
members, came forward as Vanderlyn walked into the hall. "Mr. Pargeter
has been asking for you, sir; he's in the card-room."

Vanderlyn felt a curious sensation sweep over him. That which he had
thought so improbable as to be scarcely worth consideration had come to
pass. Pargeter had not gone to England that night. He was here, in
Paris, at L'Union, asking for him. In a few moments they would be face
to face.

As Vanderlyn walked up the broad staircase, he asked himself, with a
feeling of agonising uncertainty, whether it was in any way possible
that Peggy's husband had found out, even suspected, anything of their
plan. But no! Reason told him that such a thing was quite inconceivable.
No compromising word had been written by the one to the other, and every
detail had been planned and carried out in such a way as to make
discovery or betrayal impossible.

But to-night reason had very little to say to Laurence Vanderlyn, and
his strongly drawn face set in hard lines as he sauntered through now
fast thinning rooms, for the habitue of L'Union generally seeks his
quiet home across the Seine about twelve.

As he returned the various greetings which came to him from right and
left,--for a French club has about it none of the repressive etiquette
which governs similar institutions in England and America,--the
diplomatist felt as doubtless feels any imaginative man who for the
first time goes under fire; what he experienced was not so much dread as
a wonder how he was likely to bear himself during this now imminent
meeting with Peggy's husband.

Suddenly Vanderlyn caught sight of Pargeter, and that some moments
before he himself was seen by him. The millionaire was standing watching
a game of whist, and he looked as he generally looked when at L'Union,
that is, bored and ill at ease, but otherwise much as usual.

Tom Pargeter was a short man, and though he was over forty, his fair
hair, fat face, and neat, small features gave him an almost boyish look
of youth. He had one most unusual physical peculiarity, which caused him
to be remembered by strangers: this peculiarity consisted in the fact
that one of his eyes was green and the other blue. His manners were
those of a boy, of a boorish lad, rather than of a man; his vocabulary
was oddly limited, and yet he seldom used the correct word, for he
delighted in verbal aliases.

Seeing Pargeter there before him, Laurence Vanderlyn, for the first time
in his life, learned what so many men and women learn very early in
their lives,--what it is to be afraid of a person, who, however
despicable, is, or may become, your tyrant.

Hitherto his relations with Peggy's husband, though nothing to be proud
of, had brought with them nothing of conscious shame. Nay more, Laurence
Vanderlyn, in that long past of which now nothing remained, had tried to
see what was best in a character which, if fashioned meanly, was not
wholly bad. But now, to-night, he felt that he despised, hated, and,
what was to him, far worse, feared the human being towards whom he was
advancing with apparently eager steps.

Suddenly the eyes of the two men met, but Pargeter was far too
pre-occupied with himself and his own concerns to notice anything
strained or unusual in Vanderlyn's face. All he saw was that here at
last was the man he wanted to see; his sulky face lightened, and he
walked forward with hand outstretched.

"Hullo! Grid," he cried, "so here you are at last! You see I've not
gone? There came a wire from the boy; he's hurt his knee-cap!"

Vanderlyn murmured an exclamation of concern; as they met he had wheeled
round, thus avoiding the other's hand.

"Nothing much," went on Pargeter quickly, "but of course Peggy will be
wild to go to him, so I thought I'd wait and take her to-morrow, eh!
what?"

Side by side they began walking down the long reception-room. Vanderlyn
was telling himself, with a feeling of sore, dull pain, that this was
the first time, the very first time, that he had ever known Tom Pargeter
show a kindly touch of consideration for his wife. But then this
concerned the boy, of whom the father, in his careless way, was fond and
proud; their child had always remained a link, if a slight link, between
Tom and Peggy.

"It was just too late to get a wire through to her," went on Pargeter,
fretfully, "I mean to that God-forsaken place where she's staying with
Madame de Lera; but I've arranged for her to be wired to early in the
morning. If I'd been half sharp I'd have sent the trolley for her----"

"The trolley?" repeated Vanderlyn, mechanically.

"The motor--the motor, man! But it never occurred to me to do it till it
was too late."

"Would you like me to go out to-morrow morning and fetch her back?"
asked Vanderlyn slowly.

"I wish you would!" cried the other eagerly, "then I should be sure of
her coming back in time for us to start by the twelve-twenty train. When
shall I send the trolley for you?"

"I'll go by train," said Vanderlyn shortly. "Madame de Lera's villa is
at Marly-le-Roi, isn't it?"

"Yes, haven't you ever been there?"

Vanderlyn looked at Pargeter. "No," he said very deliberately, "I
scarcely know Madame de Lera."

"How odd," said Pargeter indifferently. "Peggy's always with her, and
you and Peggy are such pals."

"One doesn't always care for one's friends' friends," said Vanderlyn
dryly. He longed to shake the other off, but Pargeter clung closely to
his side. Each put on the hat and light coat handed to him; and, when
once out on the boulevard, Pargeter slipped his hand confidingly through
the other's arm.

His touch burnt Vanderlyn.

"By the way, Grid, I've forgotten to tell you why I wanted to see you
to-night. I'd be so much obliged if you would go down to Chantilly at
the end of the week and see how that new josser's getting on. You might
drop me a line if everything doesn't seem all right."

Vanderlyn murmured a word of assent. This, then, was the reason why
Pargeter had come to L'Union that night,--simply in order to ask
Vanderlyn to keep an eye on his new trainer! To save himself, too, the
trouble of writing a letter, for Tom Pargeter was one of those modern
savers--and users--of time who prefer to conduct their correspondence
entirely by telegram.

They were now close to the Place de l'Opera. "Let's go on to 'The
Wash,'" said Pargeter suddenly.

The eyes of the two men became focussed on the long line of brilliantly
lit up windows of a flat overlooking the square. Here were the
headquarters of a Paris club, bearing the name of America's first and
greatest President, which had earned for itself the nickname of "Monaco
Junior."

Tom Pargeter was no gambler,--your immensely wealthy man rarely is,--but
it gave him pleasure to watch the primitive emotions which gambling
generally brings to the human surface, and so he spent at what he called
"The Wash" a good many of his idle hours.

"Let's turn in here for a minute," he said, eagerly, "Florac was holding
the bank two hours ago; let's go and see if he's still at it."

Vanderlyn made a movement of recoil; he murmured something about having
to be up early the next morning, but Pargeter, with the easy selfishness
which so often looks like good-nature, pressed him to go in. "It's quite
early," he urged again, and his companion was in no state of body or
mind to resist even the slight pressure of another's will.

       *       *       *       *       *

The brightly lighted rooms of "Monaco Junior" were full of colour,
sound, and movement; the atmosphere was in almost ludicrous contrast to
that of the decorous Union. The evening was only just beginning, the
rooms were full, and Pargeter was greeted with boisterous warmth; here,
if nowhere else, his money made him king.

He led the way to the card-room which, with its crowd of men surrounding
each of the tables, was very evidently the heart of the club. "Do look
at Florac!" he murmured to Vanderlyn. "When I left here a couple of
hours ago, he was winning a bit, but I expect he's losing now. I always
like to watch him play--he's such a bad loser!"

The two men had threaded their way close to the baccarat table, and now
they formed the centre of a group who were throwing furtive glances at
the banker, a pale lean Frenchman of the narrow-jowled, Spanish type so
often repeated in members of the old noblesse.

The Marquis de Florac was "somebody," to use the expressive French
phrase,--a member of that small Parisian circle of which each individual
is known by reputation to every provincial bourgeois, and to every
foreign reader of French social news.

There had been a time when de Florac had set the fashion, and that not
only in waistcoats and walking-sticks. He was a fine swordsman, and was
even now in some request as second at fashionable duels. None knew more
certainly than he every punctilio of those unwritten laws which govern
affairs of honour, and, had he been born to even a quarter of the
fortune of Tom Pargeter, his record would probably have remained
unstained. Unfortunately for him this had not been the case; he had soon
run through the moderate fortune left him by his father, and he had
ruined by his own folly, and his one vice of gambling, any chance that
might have remained to him of a good marriage.

Even in the Faubourg St. Germain,--loyal to its black sheep as are ever
the aristocracies of the old world,--Florac was now looked at askance;
and in the world of the boulevards strange stories were told as to the
expedients by which he now made--it could not be called earned--a
living. The playing of those games which can best be described as
requiring a minimum of judgment and a maximum of luck was apparently the
only occupation remaining to the Marquis de Florac, and when in funds he
was often to be found in the card-rooms of "Monaco Junior."

"He's losing now," whispered Pargeter. "I should think he's near the end
of his tether, eh? Funny how money goes from hand to hand! I don't
suppose Florac knows that it's _my_ money he's chucking away!"

"Your money?" repeated Vanderlyn with listless surprise, "d'you mean to
say that you've been lending Florac money?" He looked, with a pity in
which there entered a vague fellow-feeling, at the mask-like face of the
man against whom the luck seemed to be going so dead.

"I'm not quite a fool!" exclaimed Pargeter, piqued at the suggestion.
"All the same, Grid, it _is_ my money, or a little bit of it at any
rate!"

An English acquaintance of the two men came up to them. "The French are
a wonderful people," he said rather crossly, "everybody says that Florac
is ruined,--that he's living on ten francs a day allowed him by a kind
grandmother--and yet since I have been standing here he's dropped, at
least so I've calculated, not far short of four hundred pounds!"

A grin came over Pargeter's small neat face, and lit up his odd,
different-coloured eyes. "'_Cherchez la femme_,'" he observed, affecting
an atrocious English accent; and then he repeated, as if he were himself
the inventor, the patentee, of the admirable aphorism, "'_Cherchez la
femme!_' That's what you have got to do in the case of Florac, and of a
good many other Frenchmen of his kind, I fancy!"

"I'm going home now, Pargeter," said Vanderlyn with sudden, harsh
decision. "If you really wish me to go out to Marly-le-Roi in one of
your cars to-morrow morning, will you please give orders for it to be
round at my place at nine o'clock?"




V.


From what seemed an infinite distance, Vanderlyn awoke the next morning
to hear the suave voice of his servant, Poulain, murmuring in his ear,
"The automobile is here to take Monsieur for a drive in the country. I
did not wish to wake Monsieur, but the chauffeur declared that Monsieur
desired the automobile to be here at nine."

Poulain's master sat up in bed and stared at Poulain. Then suddenly he
remembered everything that had happened to him the evening before. In a
flash he even lived once more the wakeful hours of the night which had
had so awful a beginning; only at four o'clock had he found sleep.

"Yes?" he said. Then again, "Yes, Poulain. I wished to start at nine
o'clock. Say that I shall be down in a quarter of an hour."

"And then, while Monsieur is dressing, my wife will be preparing his
little breakfast--unless, indeed, Monsieur would rather wait, and have
his little breakfast in bed?"

"No," said Vanderlyn, quickly, "I shall not have time to wait for
coffee."

       *       *       *       *       *

The keen morning air, the swift easy motion of the large car revived
Vanderlyn and steadied his nerves. He elected to sit in front by the
side of Pargeter's silent English chauffeur. At this early hour the
Paris streets were comparatively clear, and a few moments brought them
to the Avenue du Bois de Boulogne. There, half way down was Tom
Pargeter's splendid villa; as they passed it in a flash, Vanderlyn
averted his head. To his morbid fancy it suddenly assumed the aspect of
a great marble tomb.

The car swung on through the now deserted Bois; soon it was rushing up
the steep countrified streets of St. Cloud, and then, settling down to a
high speed, they found themselves in the broad silent alleys of those
splendid royal woods which form so noble a girdle about western Paris.
They sped through sunlit avenues of fresh green foliage, past old houses
which had seen the splendid pageant of Louis the Fifteenth and his Court
sweep by on their way to Marly-le-Roi, and so till they gained the lofty
ridge which dominates the wide valley of the Seine.

Suddenly the chauffeur turned to Vanderlyn, and spoke for the first
time: "Would you like to slow down a bit, sir? Mrs. Pargeter generally
stops the car here to have a look at the view."

"No," said Vanderlyn hoarsely, "we haven't time to-day; we've got to get
back to Paris in time for Mr. and Mrs. Pargeter to catch, if possible,
the twelve-twenty o'clock train."

He leant back--a feeling of horror and self-contempt possessed him. His
life was now one long lie; even when speaking to a servant, he was
compelled to imply what he knew to be untrue.

They ran down into the quaint little town which has scarcely altered
since the days when Madame du Barry was dragged hence, screaming and
wringing her hands, to Paris, to prison, and to the guillotine.
Vanderlyn's distraught imagination saw something sinister in the
profound quietude of the place; it was full of shuttered villas, for
through the winter each village in the neighbourhood of Paris
hibernates, those whom the peasants style les bourgeois still regarding
country life as essentially a summer pastime.

They now came to a high blank wall, broken by an iron gate. "This is the
house, sir," said the chauffeur abruptly.

Vanderlyn jumped out, and rang a primitive bell; he waited some minutes
and then rang again. At last he heard the sound of steps hurrying along
a gravel path; and the gate was opened by an old woman.

"You have come to the wrong house," she said curtly, "this is Madame de
Lera's villa." Then, as she caught sight of the Pargeters' chauffeur, a
more amiable look stole over her wizened face,--"Pardon, perhaps
Monsieur has brought a letter from Madame Pargeter?" She wiped her hand
on her apron and held it out.

Vanderlyn remained silent a moment; he knew that now had come the moment
for him to utter an exclamation of surprise, to explain that he had
thought to find Mrs. Pargeter here,--but his soul revolted from the lie.

"Yes, I have come to see Madame de Lera," he said in a low voice.
"Kindly give her my card, and ask her if she will be good enough to
receive me?"

The old woman turned on her heel; she led Vanderlyn into the silent
house, and showed him into a large sitting-room where the furniture was
still swathed in the rough sheeting with which the careful French
housewife drapes her household goods when leaving them for the winter.

"I will light the fire," said the servant, apologetically; "Madame does
not use this room when we are here alone."

"I am quite warm," said Vanderlyn quickly. "Besides, I shall only be
here a very few moments."

The woman gave him a curious, rather suspicious look, and went to find
her mistress.

Vanderlyn, in spite of the words he had just uttered, suddenly told
himself that, he felt cold--cold and dizzy. He moved over to the window.
It overhung a wooded precipice, below which sparkled the Seine,--that
same river into whose dark depths he had gazed so despairingly the night
before. Here, looking at the sunlit panorama of wood, water, and sky
spread out before him, Peggy must often have stood. For the first time
since the terrible moment when he had watched the train bearing her dead
body disappear into the darkness, Vanderlyn thought of her as living; he
seemed to feel her soft, warm presence in this place which she had
loved, and where she had spent peaceful, happy hours.

He heard the door open and shut, and, turning round, found himself face
to face with the Frenchwoman whom he knew to have been Margaret
Pargeter's devoted friend. Although he was well aware that Madame de
Lera had never liked or trusted him, he, on his side, had always admired
and appreciated her serenity and simple dignity of demeanour. As she
came forward, clad in the austere dress of a French widow, he noted the
expression of constraint, of surprise, on her worn face.

"Mr. Vanderlyn?" she said, interrogatively; and, as she waited for an
explanation of the American's presence, surprise gave way to a look of
great sternness and severity, almost of dislike. Nay more, Madame de
Lera's attitude was instinct with protest--the protest of an honest
woman drawn unwillingly into what she feels to be an atmosphere of
untruth and intrigue. She was telling herself that she owed the fact of
Vanderlyn's visit to some slight hitch in the plan in which she had been
persuaded to play the part of an accomplice; she felt that Margaret
Pargeter ought not to have subjected her to an interview with her lover.

Vanderlyn reddened. He felt suddenly angered. Madame de Lera's manner
was insulting, not only to him, but--but to Mrs. Pargeter, to his poor
dead love. Any thought of telling Madame de Lera the truth, or even part
of the truth, left him.

"You must forgive my intrusion," he said, coldly; "I have come with a
message from Mr. Pargeter. He believes his wife to be here, and he
wishes her to be informed that her son, little Jasper, has had an
accident. When the news arrived last night, it was too late to
telegraph, and so he asked me to come here this morning in his motor in
order to bring Mrs. Pargeter back to Paris. He proposes that she should
accompany him to England to-day by the twelve o'clock train."

An expression of deep bewilderment crossed Madame de Lera's face. For
the first time since she had glanced at Vanderlyn, she became aware that
she was in the presence of a man who was suffering under some keen
stress of feeling. She became oppressed with a great misgiving. What did
his presence here this morning, his strange unreal words, signify? What
was the inward meaning of this sinister comedy? It was of course clear
that the secret elopement had not taken place. But then, where _was_
Mrs. Pargeter?

She cast a long searching look at Laurence Vanderlyn. The American's
face had become expressionless. He seemed tired, like a man who had not
slept, but the look she thought she had surprised,--that look telling of
the suppression of deep feeling, of hidden anguish,--had gone. The fact
that she did not know how much Vanderlyn knew she knew added to Madame
de Lera's perplexity. She was determined at all costs not to betray her
friend.

"I regret to inform you," she said, quietly, "that Mrs. Pargeter is not
here. It is true that I was expecting her to come yesterday. But she
disappointed me--she did not come. Does no one know where she is?" She
threw as great an emphasis as was possible in the impassive French
language into her question.

Vanderlyn avoided her perplexed, questioning glance. "Since yesterday
evening," he answered, "all trace of Margaret Pargeter has been lost.
She seems to have left her house about six o'clock, and then to have
disappeared--utterly. The servants believed," he added, after a pause,
"that she was coming straight to you; she had, it seems, taken some
luggage to the station the day before, and seen personally to its
despatch."

There was a pause; neither spoke for some moments, and Madame de Lera
noticed that Vanderlyn had not asked her if Peggy's luggage had arrived
at her house.

"Then, Monsieur, it is surely clear," she exclaimed at last, "that there
has been an accident, a terrible accident to our poor friend! I mean on
her way to--to the station. But doubtless that thought has also occurred
to you--if not to Mr. Pargeter--and you have already made all necessary
enquiries?"

Vanderlyn, from being pale, flushed deeply. "No," he said, "I am afraid
nothing of the kind has been done--yet. You see, Pargeter believes her
to be here."

The words "But you--_you_ knew she was not here!" trembled on Madame de
Lera's lips, but she did not utter them. She felt as if she were walking
amid quicksands; she told herself that there was far more danger in
saying a word too much than a word too little.

"I regret," she said, "that you have made a useless journey, Mr.
Vanderlyn. I must request you to go back and tell Mr. Pargeter that his
wife is not here, and I beg, I entreat, you to inform the police that
she is missing! For all we know,"--she looked at him with indignant
severity,--"she may be lying ill, mortally injured, in one of our
terrible Paris hospitals!"

As he made no assent to her imploring words, a look of anger came into
Madame de Lera's eyes.

"I will ask you to allow me to return with you to Paris," she said,
quickly. "I cannot rest inactive here in the face of the possibility,
nay, the probability, I have indicated. If you, Mr. Vanderlyn, do not
feel justified in making the enquiries I have suggested, no such scruple
need restrain _me_."

She turned away, making no effort to mask her displeasure, almost her
contempt, for the man who seemed to be so little moved by the mysterious
disappearance of the woman he loved.

A few moments later Madame de Lera came back dressed for the drive. As
they walked through into the hall of the villa, she suddenly turned, and
with a strange gentleness asked her silent companion a question, "Mr.
Vanderlyn, you look very tired; have you had any breakfast?"

He looked at her without answering, and she repeated her words.

"Yes," said Vanderlyn,--"that is, no, I have not. I was up late last
night,--there was no time this morning," he spoke hurriedly, confusedly;
the sudden kindness in her tone had brought scalding tears to his eyes,
and he felt a nervous fear that he was about to break down. Madame de
Lera took his arm; she opened a door and pushed him through into the
kitchen, just now the one bright, warm, cheerful room in the house.

"My good Catherine," she said, "give this gentleman a cup of
coffee--quickly!"

The presence of the old servant steadied Vanderlyn's nerves; with a
muttered word of thanks he drank what was put before him, and then they
went out, across the dewy lawn, to the gate.

Vanderlyn placed his companion in the back of the car, and himself took
the vacant seat next to Pargeter's phlegmatic chauffeur, for he wished
to remain silent. Madame de Lera's alteration of manner, her gentleness,
her implied sympathy, frightened him. He would rather have endured her
cold air of protest, of dislike.

And yet, as they drove swiftly back to Paris, taking, however, rather
longer on the return journey, for the country roads were now full of
animation and movement, Vanderlyn felt himself leaning, as against a
wall, on Madame de Lera's strong upright nature. She might dislike,
disapprove, even despise him,--but in this matter they would be one in
their desire to shield Peggy's fair name. He would have given much to be
able to still her evident anxiety, but that course was, so he felt,
forbidden to him; he had no right to share with another human being the
burden of his knowledge, of his awful grief. With a pang he reminded
himself that even Madame de Lera's state of suspense was preferable to a
knowledge of the truth.

At last they turned into the Bois de Boulogne, rushing through the leafy
roads at a high speed; a few moments more would see them in the
beautiful avenue where stood, isolated from its neighbours, the Villa
Pargeter, instinct with flamboyant luxury and that perfection only
achieved by the lavish use of money.

Tom Pargeter had a supreme contempt for the careless way in which the
French millionaires of his acquaintance conducted their lives. He liked
to get the full value of his money, and was proud of boasting to his
intimates that he kept the people who worked for him up to the top mark.
So it was that the sanded garden, even now blazing with flowers, which
surrounded the square marble villa, and separated it from the carriage
road and tan gallop, looked like a set piece, a vivid bit of scene
painting, in the bright morning sunlight.

When they came within sight of the wrought bronze gates of the villa,
Madame de Lera stood up in the car and leant over the front. She touched
Vanderlyn on the shoulder. "Then if we find that Mr. Pargeter is still
without any knowledge of his wife, I am to say that I know nothing--that
I was expecting her yesterday evening, and that she never arrived?"

"Yes," he answered, "that is, Madame, what I expect to hear you say. It
will then be for Mr. Pargeter to take what steps he judges proper."

As the powerful car swung through the gates, Vanderlyn saw that the
front-door was wide open, and that the English butler was waiting to
receive them; when the man saw that his mistress was not in the car, a
look of perplexity came over his impassive face.

"Mr. Pargeter has been awaiting you, sir, for the last half hour," he
said, "he is very anxious to catch the twelve o'clock express. The
luggage has already gone on to the station. Mr. Pargeter wished the car
to wait,--but--but is it to wait, sir?" he asked, helplessly.

"Yes," said Vanderlyn, shortly, "the car had better wait. Where is Mr.
Pargeter?"

"He's not down yet, sir; he is breakfasting in his dressing-room. All
the arrangements were made last night, but I will let him know you have
arrived, sir." He looked doubtfully at Madame de Lera, too well trained
to ask any question, and yet sufficiently human not to be able to
conceal his astonishment at Mrs. Pargeter's non-appearance. Then,
preceding the two visitors upstairs, he led them through the suite of
large reception-rooms into a small octagon boudoir which was habitually
used by Margaret Pargeter as her sitting-room.

There he left them, and, standing amid surroundings which all spoke to
them, to the woman, of her friend, to the man of his love,--from the
hooded chair where Peggy generally sat to the little writing-table where
she had written so many notes to them both,--Madame de Lera and Laurence
Vanderlyn felt overwhelmed with a common feeling of shame, of guilt. In
silence they waited for Tom Pargeter, avoiding each other's eyes; and
the Frenchwoman's fine austere face grew rigid--this was the first time
in her long life that she had been connected with an intrigue. She felt
humiliated, horrified at the part she now found herself compelled to
play.

In spite of its costly luxury, and its wonderful beauty of
decoration,--an exquisite Nattier was let into a panel above the
fireplace, and a row of eighteenth-century pastels hung on the light
grey walls,--the octagon apartment lacked the restful charm which
belongs to many a shabby little sitting-room. The architect of the villa
had sacrificed everything to the great reception-rooms, and in the
boudoir were far too many doors.

One of these, which Vanderlyn had never noticed before, was now suddenly
flung open, and, outlined against a narrow winding staircase, stood a
figure which appeared at once grotesque and menacing to the man and
woman who stood staring at the unexpected apparition. It was Tom
Pargeter, clad in a bright yellow dressing-gown, and holding a fork in
his left hand.

"I say, Peggy, look sharp,--there's no time to be lost! I told Plimmer
to pack some of your things--not that there's any reason why you should
come if you don't want to--for there's nothing much the matter with the
boy, and he'll probably get well all the quicker if you----"

The speaker suddenly broke short the quick sentences; he stared round
the little room, and then, catching sight of Madame de Lera who had been
partly concealed by a screen, "Damn!" he said, and turning, scampered
heavily up the staircase, leaving the door behind him open.

Vanderlyn and his companion looked at each other uncomfortably. Madame
de Lera was not perhaps quite so shocked, either by Pargeter's
appearance or by his one exclamation apparently addressed to herself, as
the punctilious American supposed her to be. She knew no word of the
English language, and in her heart regarded all foreigners as
barbarians.

They waited,--it seemed a long, long time, but as a matter of fact it
was but a very few minutes after Pargeter's abrupt entrance and exit,
when his short quick steps were heard resounding down the long suite of
reception-rooms. As he walked into the boudoir, the master of the
house--this time dressed in a suit of the large checks he generally
wore--bowed awkwardly to Madame de Lera, and then went over and shut the
door giving access to the winding staircase, that which in his hurry he
had omitted to close behind him. Then, and not till then, he turned to
Laurence Vanderlyn.

"Well?" he said, "what's happened to Peggy? I'm told she's not here. Is
she ill?"

"Peggy never arrived at Marly-le-Roi," said Vanderlyn.

To himself his very voice seemed changed, his words charged with
terrible significance; but to Pargeter, the answer given to his question
sounded disagreeably indifferent and matter-of-fact.

"Never arrived?" he echoed. "Where is she then? You don't mean to say
she's lost?"

"Madame de Lera," said Vanderlyn, still in the same quiet, emotionless
voice, "thinks that she's met with an accident,"--he looked imploringly
at the Frenchwoman; surely it was time that she should come to his help.
"I am telling Mr. Pargeter," he said to her in French, "that you fear
she has met with an accident"

"Yes!" she exclaimed, eagerly turning to Pargeter, "how can it be
otherwise, Monsieur?" She hesitated, looked at Vanderlyn, then quickly
withdrew her eyes from his face. His eyes were full of agony. She felt
as if she had peered through a secret window of another's soul.

"That is why I have come back to Paris," she went on, addressing Peggy's
husband, "for I feel that not a moment should be lost in making
enquiries. There are certain places where they take those who meet with
accidents in our streets--accidents, alas! more and more frequent every
day. Let us start at once and make enquiries."

Tom Pargeter heard her out with obvious impatience. But still his
varnish of good breeding so far lasted that he muttered a word or two of
gratitude for the trouble she had taken. Then he turned to Laurence
Vanderlyn.

"Surely _you_ don't think anything has happened to her, Grid?" he asked,
nervously. "Now I come to think of it, she was a fool not to take one of
the cars. Then we should have had none of this worry. I've always said
the Paris cabs weren't safe. What d'ye think we had better do? We can't
start out and make a round of all the hospitals--the idea's absurd!"
Waiting a moment, he added dismally, "It's clear I can't take that
twelve-twenty train."

He walked over to one of the windows, and drummed with his fingers on
the pane.

Although Madame de Lera did not understand a word he said, Pargeter's
attitude was eloquent of how he had taken the astounding news, and she
looked at him with angry perplexity and pain. She said something in a
low voice to Vanderlyn; as a result he walked up to Pargeter and touched
him on the shoulder.

"Tom," he said, "I'm afraid something ought to be done, and done
quickly. Madame de Lera suggests that we go to the Prefecture of Police;
every serious accident is, of course, always reported there at once."

The other turned--"All right," he said, sullenly, "just as you like! But
I bet you anything that after we have taken all that trouble, we shall
come back to find Peggy, or news of her, here. You don't know her as
well as I do! I don't believe she's had an accident; I daresay you'll
laugh at me, Grid, but all I can say is that I don't _feel_ she's had an
accident. Take my word for it, old man, there's nothing to be frightened
about. Why, you look quite pale!"

There came the distant sound of a telephone bell. "There!" he cried, "I
expect that _is_ Peggy, or news of her. What a bore it is having three
telephones in a house!" He left the room, and a moment later they heard
him shouting to his butler.

Vanderlyn turned to Madame de Lera. "He doesn't believe that Mrs.
Pargeter has had an accident," he said, quietly, "you must not judge him
too harshly." He added, after a moment, "I think you must know, Madame
de Lera, that Mrs. Pargeter's husband has always been lacking in
imagination."

Her only answer was a shrug of her shoulders.




VI.


Once a year the newspapers of each great capital publish, among other
statistics, a record of the disappearances which have occurred in their
midst during the preceding twelve months. These disappearances are not
counted by tens or by hundreds, but by thousands; and what is true of
every great city is in a very special sense true of Paris, the human
Cloaca Maxima of the world. There, the sudden vanishing, the
obliteration as it were, of a human being--especially of a
foreigner--arouses comparatively little surprise or interest among those
whose weary duty it is to try and find what has become of the lost one.

To Madame de Lera,--even to Tom Pargeter,--the beginning of what was to
be so singular and perplexing a quest had about it something
awe-inspiring and absorbing. So it was that during the few minutes which
elapsed between their leaving the Avenue du Bois de Bologne and their
reaching the ancient building where the Paris Police still has its
headquarters, not a word was spoken by either of the two ill-assorted
companions who sat together in the rear of the car, for Vanderlyn, the
only one of the three who knew where the Prefecture of Police is
situated, had been placed next to the chauffeur in order that he might
direct him as to the way thither.

By such men as Tom Pargeter and their like, the possibility of material
misfortune attacking themselves and those who form what may be called
their appanage, is never envisaged; and therefore, when such misfortune
comes to them, as it does sooner or later to all human beings, the grim
guest's presence is never accepted without an amazed sense of struggle
and revolt.

The news of the accident to his little son had angered Pargeter, and
made him feel ill-used, but that it should have been followed by this
mystery concerning his wife's whereabouts seemed to add insult to
injury. So it was an ill-tempered, rather than an anxious man who joined
Vanderlyn on the worn steps of the huge frowning building wherein is
housed that which remains the most permanent and the most awe-inspiring
of Parisian institutions.

As they passed through the great portals Tom Pargeter smiled, for the
first time; "We shall soon have news of her, Grid," he murmured,
confidently.

Vanderlyn winced as he nodded a dubious assent.

But at first everything went ill with them. Pargeter insisted on sending
for the police interpreter and stating his business in English; then,
irritated at the man's lack of comprehension, he broke out--to
Vanderlyn's surprise--into voluble French. But as the two foreigners
were sent from room to room in the old-fashioned, evil-smelling
building, as endless forms were placed before them to be filled up, it
became increasingly clear that the disappearance of a human being,
especially of an Englishwoman, did not strike the listless employees as
being particularly remarkable.

The more angry Pargeter grew and the more violent in his language, the
more politely, listlessly, indifferent became those to whom he addressed
his questions and indignant complaints.

The cosmopolitan millionaire-sportsman, accustomed to receive a constant
stream of adulation and consideration from all those with whom life
brought him in contact, was first amazed, and then angered, by the lack
of interest shown in him and in his affairs at the Prefecture of Police.

Then, to his surprise and only half-concealed mortification, a reference
made by Laurence Vanderlyn to an incident which had taken place the year
before--that is, to the disappearance of an American citizen--followed
by the production of the diplomatist's card, brought about a magic
change.

Immediately the two friends were introduced into the presence of an
important official; and a moment later Tom Pargeter's outraged dignity
and sense of importance were soothed by an outpouring of respectful
sympathy, while in an incredibly short time the full particulars of
every accident which had occurred in the streets of Paris during the
last twenty-four hours were laid before the anxious husband. But it soon
became clear that in none of these had Mrs. Pargeter been concerned.

The official left the room a moment; then he returned with a colleague.

This man, the chief of the detective force, proceeded with considerable
tact to examine and cross-examine both Pargeter and Vanderlyn concerning
the way in which Mrs. Pargeter had spent the earlier part of the
previous day--that is, the day on which she had disappeared.

The man's manner--that of scenting a secret, of suspecting that more lay
behind the matter than was admitted by the husband and friend of the
woman they were seeking--produced a disagreeable impression on
Vanderlyn. For the first time he felt himself faced by a vague, but none
the less real, danger, and the feeling braced him.

"Then Monsieur did not see this lady yesterday at all?"

"No," said Vanderlyn, shortly; "the last time I saw Mrs. Pargeter in her
house was the day before yesterday, when I called on her about five
o'clock."

"Monsieur is not related to the lady," asked the detective quietly.

"No," said Vanderlyn again. "But I am an old friend of both Mr. and Mrs.
Pargeter, and that is why he asked me to accompany him here to-day."

"Then when and how did you yourself first learn of Madame Pargeter's
disappearance?" asked the other suddenly.

Vanderlyn hesitated; for a moment his tired brain refused to act--when
was he supposed to have heard of Peggy's disappearance? He looked
helplessly at Pargeter, then said suddenly, "I met my friend at L'Union
last night."

"Then you already knew of Madame's disappearance last night?" said the
official eagerly.

"No! no!" exclaimed Pargeter crossly. "Of course we didn't know then! We
didn't know till just now--that is, till this morning, when Mr.
Vanderlyn went out to Madame de Lera's villa to fetch my wife. It was
Madame de Lera who told us that she had never arrived at Marly-le-Roi.
She disappeared yesterday afternoon, but we did not know it till this
morning."

"May I ask you, gentlemen, to wait for a moment while I make certain
enquiries?" observed the detective politely. "You have not yet been
shown our daily report concerning the stations of Paris--is it not
possible that Madame Pargeter may have met with some accident at the
Gare St. Lazare, if, as I understand, she was going to her friend by
train, and not by automobile?"

Pargeter seemed struck by the notion. He turned to Vanderlyn. "I can't
make out," he said in a puzzled tone, "why Peggy thought of going to
Marly-le-Roi by train when she might so easily have gone in her new
motor."

"Peggy gave her man a week's holiday," said Vanderlyn shortly. "You
know, Tom, that he wanted to go to his own home, somewhere in Normandy."

"Yes, yes. Of course! But still she might have gone out in the big
car--I wasn't using it yesterday."

The detective came back at the end of what seemed to both Vanderlyn and
Pargeter a very long quarter of an hour.

"No incident of any sort took place last night at the Gare St. Lazare,"
he said briefly. "We shall now institute a thorough enquiry among our
agents; every police-station in Paris shall be notified of the fact that
Madame Pargeter is missing; and I shall almost certainly be able to send
you some kind of news of her by four o'clock this afternoon. In any case
you can trust us to do our best. Will Monsieur be returning to the
Avenue du Bois"--he addressed Vanderlyn, "or is Monsieur going to his
own flat in the Rue de Rivoli?"

Vanderlyn looked up quickly. His private address was not printed on the
card he had shown; still it was reasonable enough that this man should
have looked up his own as well as Pargeter's address and should have
wished to verify their statements as far as was possible.

"Of course, Grid, you will come home with me!" exclaimed Pargeter
fretfully.

"Then, Messieurs, I will send any news I get straight to the Avenue du
Bois de Boulogne."

As they walked through the long corridors, it became clear that whatever
anxiety Pargeter had suffered had dropped off him, for the moment, like
a cloak. "I shouldn't be surprised if I can get off to-night after all,"
he said cheerfully, "you heard what he said? This afternoon we shall
certainly have news of her."

Then, as they emerged into the hall, and he caught sight of his
motor-car and of its occupant, "For God's sake, Grid," he said frowning,
"let's get rid of that old woman! There she sits, staring like a bird of
prey; it's enough to give one the hump! Ask her if she would like us to
drive her to her Paris house. If she wants to go back to the country,
I'll send her in Peggy's Limousine--oh! I forgot, that's not available,
is it? Never mind, she can go on in this car. Say we'll send her news as
soon as we hear any!"

But Vanderlyn soon ascertained that Madame de Lera had no wish to go
back to Marly-le-Roi. She accepted his brief account of what had
occurred at the Prefecture of Police without comment, and, refusing
Pargeter's offer to drive her to her house in the Faubourg St. Germain,
asked only to be set down at the nearest telegraph-station.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dreary hours followed--hours later remembered with special horror and
shrinking by Laurence Vanderlyn. They were spent by the two ill-assorted
friends in Tom Pargeter's own room on the ground-floor of the villa.

It was a long, well-lighted room, lined with the huge, splendidly
decorative posters, signed Cheret and Mucha, which were then just being
collected by those who admired that type of flamboyant art. In this
apartment Peggy, as Vanderlyn was well aware, never put her feet, for it
was there that her husband received his trainer and his sporting
friends. Here also was his own private telephone.

Lunch was brought to them on a tray, and at two o'clock the butler came
with the information that several police officials were in the house
interrogating the servants. Far from annoying Pargeter, the fact seemed
to afford him some gratification, for it proved that he was after all
quite as important a personage as he believed himself to be. He gave
orders that the men were to be liberally supplied with drink.

An hour later came a high official from the Prefecture. He was taken
upstairs and shown into the drawing-room, and it was there that Pargeter
joined him, leaving Vanderlyn for the first time alone.

The American lay back in the rocking-chair in which he had been sitting
forward listening to the other's unconnected talk. What a relief, what
an immense sense of sobbing relief--came over his weary senses, aye,
even his weary limbs! He put away the thought, the anguished query, as
to how long this awful ordeal was likely to endure. For the moment it
was everything to be alone. He closed his smarting eyes.

Suddenly the telephone bell rang, violently. Vanderlyn got up slowly;
stumblingly he walked across the room and took up the receiver. A
woman's voice asked in French:

"Has Mr. Pargeter left Paris?"

"No," said Vanderlyn shortly. "Mr. Pargeter is still in Paris."

"Is it a friend of Mr. Pargeter who is speaking?"

There was a long pause,--then, "Yes," said Vanderlyn.

"Will you, Monsieur, kindly inform your friend," said the voice, shaking
with a ripple of light laughter, "that Mademoiselle de la Tour de Nesle
has something very urgent to say to him?"

"Mr. Pargeter is engaged, but I will give him any message."

"May I ask you, Monsieur, to have the gracious amiability to inform Mr.
Pargeter that Mademoiselle de la Tour de Nesle will be expecting him at
five o'clock this afternoon. She understood he was leaving Paris
yesterday, but someone told her that he had been seen driving in his
auto on the grand boulevards this morning."

A few moments later Pargeter burst into the room.

"They declare that Peggy must have left Paris!" he exclaimed. "I thought
as much," he went on, angrily. "I felt certain that she was only hiding!
Of course I didn't like to say so--at first," and, as Vanderlyn remained
silent, he came and flung himself in a chair close to the other man.

"You see, Grid,"--his voice unconsciously lowered,--"she played me that
trick once before--years ago! It was a regular bit of bad luck, the sort
of thing that only seems to happen to me; other men escape. A woman came
to our house,--we were living in London then,--an old friend of mine
with whom I'd stupidly mixed up again; she brought a child with her, a
squalling brat two or three months older than Jasper--Of course the
child had nothing to do with me, but she said he had, and Peggy believed
her!" he looked for sympathy to the silent man opposite to whom he was
now sitting.

"Did you ever hear of this before?" he asked suspiciously, "did Peggy
ever tell you about it?"

"No," said Vanderlyn. "This is the first time I have heard anything of
it. How long did she stay away?" he forced himself to add, loathing
himself the while: "Did she disappear like this--I mean, as she has done
this time?"

"Well, not exactly," said Pargeter reluctantly, "for one thing she took
Jasper and his nurse with her, but not her maid. They went off to her
aunt,--the aunt who brought her up, you know,--but for two days I hadn't
a notion where she was! Then one of her brothers came to see me. It was
all made as damned unpleasant for me as possible, but they were of
course determined that she should come back to me, and so she did--after
about a week. But she was never nice to me again," he added, moodily,
"not that she ever was really nice to me before we married. It was the
aunt who hunted me----"

"Is there any special reason why Peggy should have thought of going away
like that--now?" asked Vanderlyn in a strained voice.

"No," exclaimed Pargeter, "of course there isn't! I've always been nice
to her, as you know well, Grid,--much nicer, I mean, than most men would
have been to a wife who was so--so--" he sought intently for a word, "so
superior and--and unsympathetic. But lately I have been specially nice
to her, for my sister, Sophy, you know, had written me a long screed,--I
didn't bother to read it right through, making out that Peggy's heart
was weak, and that I ought to be very careful about her. The very day I
got the letter I went out and bought her that grey Limousine Lady Prynne
was so keen I should take off her hands! Peggy always had everything she
wanted," he repeated; "I didn't have a penny with her, but I've never
grudged her anything. In fact I should be pleased if she spent more on
her clothes than she seems to care to do, for I like to see a woman well
trigged out."

"Tom, I have a message for you," said Vanderlyn slowly, "a lady
telephoned just now to say she's expecting you at five o'clock."

"Eh! what?" said Pargeter, his fair face flushing, "a lady? What lady?
Did she give her name?"

"Mademoiselle de la Tour de Nesle," said Vanderlyn, with curling lip.

"Oh Lord! What a plague women are!" said the other, crossly. "Sometimes
I think it's a pity God ever made Eve! Such impudence, her ringing up
here! Still, she's an amusing little devil."

"Are you going to see her?" asked Vanderlyn, "because if so I think I
had better be getting back to my place. You see, I've rather neglected
my work to-day."

Something in the other's tone impressed Pargeter disagreeably.

"I say, don't be shirty!" he exclaimed, "I know you've had a lot of
bother, and I'm awfully grateful to you, and so will Peggy be when she
knows. I sha'n't make up my mind about going to see Nelly till the last
minute----"

"Nelly?" repeated Vanderlyn, puzzled--"Who's Nelly?"

"You know, Grid,--the--the person who rang me up. I always call her
Nelly. Her name's such a mouthful--still, it's Nelly's Tower, isn't it?
See? Perhaps to-day as there's all this fuss on I'd better not go and
see her, eh, Grid? I wish I was like you," he added, a little
shamefacedly, "you're such a puritan. I suppose that's why Peggy's so
fond of you. Birds of a feather, eh? what?" his manner grew sensibly
more affectionate and confidential.

The two men smoked on in silence. Vanderlyn was trying to choose a form
of words with which he could bid the other farewell; he longed with a
miserable longing to be alone, but that first day's ordeal was not yet
over.

"I can't face dinner here," said Pargeter suddenly, "let's go and dine
at that new place, the Coq d'Or."

Vanderlyn lacked the energy to say him nay, and they went out, leaving
word where they were to be found.

Le Coq d'Or was a reconstitution of what had been, in a now deserted
suburban resort, a famous restaurant dedicated to the memory and cult of
Rabelais. Vanderlyn had already been there with American friends, but to
Pargeter the big room, with its quaint mediaeval furnishings and large
panels embodying adventures of Gargantua, was new, and for a moment
distracted his mind from what was still more of a grievance than an
anxiety.

But they had not long been seated at one of the narrow oak tables which
were supposed to be exact copies of those used in a mediaeval tavern,
when Pargeter began to turn sulky. The maitre d'hotel of the Coq d'Or
was not aware of how important a guest was honouring him that night, and
for a few moments no attention was paid to the two friends.

"I say, this is no good!" exclaimed Pargeter angrily, "let's go
somewhere else--to the Cafe de Paris."

"For God's sake, Tom," exclaimed Vanderlyn harshly, "sit down! Can't you
see I'm tired out? Let's stay where we are."

"All right. But I can tell you that at this rate we sha'n't get anything
till midnight!" Still Pargeter sat down again, and fortunately there
soon came up a waiter who had known the great sportsman elsewhere; and a
moment later he was absorbed in the amusing occupation of making out a
careful menu from a new bill of fare.

During the long course of the meal, Vanderlyn listened silently to
Pargeter's conjectures concerning Peggy's disappearance--conjectures
broken by lamentations over the contretemps which had made it impossible
for him to leave Paris that day. Absorbed as he was in himself and his
own grievances, Pargeter was yet keenly aware when his companion's
attention seemed in any way to wander, and at last there came a moment
when, leaving his cup of black coffee half full, he pushed his chair
away with a gesture of ill-temper.

"I'm afraid, Grid, all this must be an infernal bore for you!" he said;
"after all, Peggy's not your wife--no woman has the right to lead you
such a dance as she has led me to-day. Let's try to forget her for a
bit; let's go along to 'The Wash'?"

Vanderlyn shook his head; he felt spent, worn out. He muttered that he
had work to do, that it was time for him to turn in.

Each man paid his portion of the bill, and, as they went through the
glass doors giving onto the Boulevard, Vanderlyn noticed that on each
side of the entrance to the Coq d'Or a man was standing, sentinel-wise,
as if waiting for someone to go in or come out.

For a moment the two friends stood on the pavement.

"Let's take a fiacre," said Pargeter suddenly, "and I'll drive you to
your place." The warm spring weather had brought out a number of open
cabs. They hailed one of these, and, as they did so, Vanderlyn noticed
that the two men who had been standing at the door of the restaurant
entered another just behind them.

       *       *       *       *       *

When at last he found himself in his own flat, and at last alone,
Vanderlyn stood for a few moments in his empty sitting-room. Terrible as
had been the companioned hours of the day, he now feared to be alone. It
was too early to go to bed--and he looked back with horror to the
wakeful hours which had been his the night before. So standing there he
told himself that an hour's walk--he had not walked at all that
day--would quiet his nerves, prepare him for the next day's ordeal.

As he made his way down the broad shallow stairs, his mind seemed to
regain its elasticity. He realised that it must be his business to keep
fit. A greater ordeal than anything which had yet befallen him lay
there--in front of him. Soon, perhaps to-morrow, the Prefecture of
Police would connect the finding of a woman's dead body in the train
which had left Paris for Orange the night before, with Mrs. Pargeter's
disappearance.

It would be then that he would need all his strength and self-control.
He remembered with a thrill of anger the curious measuring glance the
head of the Paris detective force had cast on him that morning. He
wondered uneasily how far he had betrayed himself.

Passing through the porte cochere, he noticed that the concierge was
talking to a neat, stout little Frenchman with whose appearance he felt
himself familiar. Vanderlyn looked straight at the man; yes, this was
undoubtedly one of the two watchers who had been standing outside the
door of the Coq d'Or.

Then he was being followed, tracked? The Paris police evidently already
connected him in some way with the disappearance of Mrs. Pargeter?

Instead of crossing the road to the deserted pavement which bounds the
gardens of the Tuileries, the American turned to the left, and became
merged in the slowly moving stream of men and women under the arcades of
the Rue de Rivoli. As he walked along he became conscious, and that
without once turning round, that his pursuer was close behind; when he
walked slowly, the other, as far as possible, did the same, and when he
hurried on, he could hear the tap-tap dogging his footsteps through the
crowd.

At last, finding himself opposite the Hotel Continental, Vanderlyn
stopped and deliberately read over the bill of fare attached to the door
of the restaurant. As he did so, the light of a large reverbere beat
down on his face; from the human current sweeping slowly on behind him a
man quietly detached himself, and, standing for a moment by the side of
the American diplomatist, looked up into his face with a long deliberate
stare.




VII.


The fact that he was being watched had a curious effect on Laurence
Vanderlyn. It roused in him the fighting instinct which he had had to
keep in leash the whole of that terrible first day of repression, save
during the moments when he had been confronted with the head of the
detective department at the Prefecture of Police.

As at last he walked on, now choosing deliberately quiet and solitary
streets, the footsteps of his unknown companion echoed loudly behind
him, and he allowed himself, for the first time since the night before,
the cruel luxury of recollection. For the first time, also, he forced
himself to face the knowledge that any hour might bring as unexpected a
development as had been the prolonged presence of Pargeter in Paris. He
realised that he must, if possible, be prepared, forearmed, with the
knowledge of what had occurred after he had left the darkened railway
carriage at Dorgival. News travels slowly in provincial France, yet,
even so, the fact that the dead body of a woman had been found in a
first-class carriage of the Paris demi-rapide must soon have become
known, and made its way into the local press.

Out of the past there came to Vanderlyn the memory of an old-fashioned
reading-room frequented by him long years before when he was studying in
Paris.

The place had been pointed out to him by one of the professors at the
Sorbonne as being by far the best lending library on the left side of
the Seine; and there, in addition to the ordinary reading-room, was an
inner room, where, by paying a special fee, one could see all the
leading provincial papers.

In some such sheet,--for in France every little town has its own
newspaper,--would almost certainly appear the first intimation of so
sinister and mysterious a discovery as the finding of a woman's dead
body in the Paris train.

Vanderlyn wondered if the library--the Bibliotheque Cardinal was its
name--still existed. If yes, there was every chance that he might find
there what was vital to him to know, both in order to rid himself of the
obsessing vision which he saw whenever he shut his tired eyes, and also
that he might be prepared for any information suddenly forwarded to
Pargeter from the Prefecture of Police.

The next morning Vanderlyn was scarcely surprised to see the man who had
shadowed him the night before lying in wait for him before the house.

The American measured the other's weary face and stout figure, and then
he began quietly walking up the now deserted arcades of the Rue de
Rivoli; with a certain grim amusement, he gradually increased his pace,
and when at last he turned into the great court of the Louvre, and stood
for a moment at the base of the Gambetta Monument, he assured himself
that he had out-distanced his pursuer.

Striding quickly across the most historic of Paris bridges, he threaded
the narrow, tortuous thoroughfares dear to every lover of old Paris,
till he reached the Place St. Sulpice. There, forming one of the corners
of the square, was the house wherein was housed the Bibliotheque
Cardinal, looking exactly as Vanderlyn remembered its having looked
twenty years before. Even the huge leather-bound books in the windows
seemed to be the same as in the days when the future American
diplomatist had been, if not a merry-hearted, then a most enthusiastic
student, making eager acquaintance with "The Quarter."

He walked into the shop, and recognised, in the stout, middle-aged woman
sitting there, the trim young bourgeoise to whom he had often handed a
fifty centime piece in those days which seemed so distant as almost to
belong to another life.

"Have you still a provincial paper room?" he asked, in a low tone.

"Yes," said the dame du comptoir, suavely, "but we have to charge a
franc for admission."

Vanderlyn smiled. "It used to be fifty centimes," he said.

"Ah! Monsieur, that was long ago! There are ten times as many provincial
papers now as then!"

He put the piece of silver on the counter. As he did so, he heard the
door of the shop quietly open, and, with a disagreeable feeling of
surprise, he saw the man, the detective he believed he had shaken off,
come up unobtrusively to where he was standing.

Vanderlyn hesitated----Then he reminded himself that what he was about
to do belonged to the part he had set himself to play: "Well, Madame,"
he said, "I will go through into your second reading-room and glance
over the papers;" he forced himself to add, "I am anxious to find news
of a person who has disappeared--who has, I fear, met with an accident."

The detective asked a question of the woman; he spoke in a low voice,
but Vanderlyn heard what he said--that is, whether there was any other
way out of the two reading-rooms except through the shop. On the woman's
replying in the negative, he settled himself down and opened an
illustrated paper.

Vanderlyn began systematically going through the provincial papers of
the towns at which he knew the train was to stop after he had left it at
Dorgival; and after the first uneasy quarter of an hour he forgot the
watcher outside, and became absorbed in his task. To his mingled
disappointment and relief, he found nothing.

It was of course possible that on the discovery of a dead body in a
Paris train, the matter would at once be handed over to the Paris
police; that would mean, in this case, that a body so found would be
conveyed to the Morgue.

The thought that this might be so made Vanderlyn's heart quail with
anguish and horror, and yet, if such a thing were within the bounds of
possibility, had he not better go to the Morgue alone and now, rather
than later in the company of Tom Pargeter?

As he passed out of the reading-room into the book-shop, and so into the
square, he understood for the first time, how it was that he had made so
foolish a mistake concerning the detective. The latter at once entered a
fiacre which had evidently been waiting for him, and, as Vanderlyn
plunged into the labyrinth of narrow streets leading from the Place St.
Sulpice to Notre Dame, he could hear the cab crawling slowly behind him.

Well, what matter? This visit to the Morgue was also in the picture--in
the picture, that is, of Laurence Vanderlyn, the kindly friend of Tom
Pargeter, helping in the perplexing, the now agonising, search for Mrs.
Pargeter.

But when at last he came in sight of the sinister triangular building
which crouches, toad-like, under the shadow of the great Cathedral,
Vanderlyn's heart failed him for the first time. If Peggy were indeed
lying there exposed to the careless, morbid glances of idle sightseers
to whom the Morgue is one of the sights of Paris, he felt that he could
not trust himself to go in and look at her.

He stood still for a few moments, and then, as he was about to turn on
his heel, he saw coming towards him from out of the door of the Morgue a
figure which struck a note of tragedy in the bright morning sunshine. It
was Madame de Lera, her eyes full of tears, her heart oppressed by the
sights she had just seen.

"There are three poor people there," she said, in a low voice, "two men
and a woman, but not, thank God! our friend. I wonder if it is possible
that we are mistaken--that there was no accident, Monsieur Vanderlyn?
But then, if so, where is she--why has she not written to me?"

He shook his head with a hopeless gesture, afraid to speak lest he
should be tempted to share with her his agony and complicated suspense.

"If she were a Catholic," added Madame de Lera pitifully, "I should be
inclined to think--to hope--that she had gone to a convent; but--but for
her there was no such place of refuge from temptation----" her voice as
she uttered the last word became almost inaudible; more firmly she
added, "Is it not possible that she may have gone to England, to her
child?"

"No," said Vanderlyn, dully, "she has not done that."

He took her to her door, and then, as he had promised Tom Pargeter to
do, went to the Avenue du Bois, there to spend with Margaret Pargeter's
husband another term of weary waiting and suspense.

       *       *       *       *       *

That second day, of which the closing hours were destined to bring to
Laurence Vanderlyn the most dramatic and dangerous moments connected
with the whole tragic episode of Mrs. Pargeter's disappearance, wore
itself slowly, uneventfully away.

Tom Pargeter, alternating between real anxiety, and an angry suspicion
that his wife was in very truth only hiding from him, poured into the
ears of this man, whom he now regarded rather as his friend than his
wife's, every theory which might conceivably account for Peggy's
disappearance. He took note of every suggestion made to him by the
members of the now intensely excited and anxious household, for Margaret
Pargeter's gentle personality and thoughtful kindness had endeared her
to her servants.

When Plimmer, her staid maid, evolved the idea that Mrs. Pargeter, on
her way to the station, might have stopped to see some friend, and,
finding that friend ill, have remained to nurse her,--the suggestion so
seized hold of Pargeter's imagination that he insisted on spending the
afternoon in making a tour of his own and his wife's acquaintances. To
Vanderlyn's anger and pain, the only result of this action on his part
was that Mrs. Pargeter's disappearance became known to a large circle,
and that more than one of the evening papers contained a garbled
reference to the matter.

Meanwhile, or so Pargeter complained, the officials of the Prefecture of
Police remained curiously inactive. They were quite certain, so they
told the anxious husband, of ultimately solving the mystery, but it was
doubtful if any news could be procured before the next day, for they
were now directing their researches to the environs of Paris--a new
theory now evolved being that Mrs. Pargeter, having hired a motor cab to
drive her to Marly-le-Roi, had met with an accident or sinister
misadventure on the way thither.




VIII.


At last the long day wore itself out, and Vanderlyn, in the late
afternoon, found himself once more in his own rooms, alone. He only owed
his escape to-night to the fact that two of Mrs. Pargeter's relations
had arrived from England--one of her many brothers, and a woman cousin
who was fond of her. They, of course, were spending the evening with
Pargeter, and so the American had a respite--till to-morrow.

Having eaten his solitary dinner with a zest of which he felt ashamed,
he was now in his study leaning back in an easy-chair, with a pile of
unread papers at his side.

As he sat there, in the quiet, almost shabby room, which was so
curiously different from the splendours of the Pargeter villa, there
came over him a sense of profound and not unpleasing lassitude.

He looked back to the last forty-eight hours as to a long nightmare,
broken by the few solitary walks he had forced himself to take. But for
these brief periods of self-communing, he felt that his body, as well as
his mind, would and must have given way. Peggy's husband had leant
helplessly on him, and from the first moment he had been--so indifferent
onlookers would have told you--the sympathetic, helpful witness of the
various phases Tom Pargeter had lived through during those long two
days.

For something like a week Vanderlyn had been living so apart from the
world about him that he had known nothing, cared nothing, about what had
gone on in that world. That very day an allusion had been made in his
presence to some public event of importance of which he was evidently
quite ignorant, and the look of profound astonishment which had crossed
an Embassy colleague's face, warned him that he could not go on as he
had been doing without provoking considerable, and far from pleasant,
comment.

Putting out his hand, he took up the _New York Herald_--not the Paris
edition, in which there was almost certain to be allusions to that which
he wished for the moment to forget--but the old home paper which had
arrived by that day's mail, and which had been carefully opened and
ironed out by the faithful Poulain.

The newspaper was a little over a week old; it bore the date, April 28.
What had he been doing on the twenty-eighth of April? and then with a
rush it all came back to him--everything he wished for the moment to
forget. It was on the afternoon of that day, the first warm spring day
of the year, that they had been tempted, he and Peggy, to make their way
down into the heart of Paris, to the solitary Place des Vosges. It was
there, it was then, that they had together planned that which had
brought him to his present dreadful pass.

Vanderlyn put the paper back on the table, and his face fell forward on
his hands; was he fated never to be allowed to forget--not even for a
moment?

It was with relief that he welcomed the interruption caused by the
entrance of his servant bearing a card in his hand. "A gentleman has
come and insists on seeing Monsieur."

Poulain spoke in a mysterious, significant tone, one that jarred on
Vanderlyn's sensitive nerves. The disappearance of Mrs. Pargeter had
become an engrossing, a delightful drama, not only to the members of the
Pargeter household, but also to Poulain and his worthy wife; and it had
been one of the smaller ironical agonies of Vanderlyn's position that he
did not feel himself able to check or discourage their perpetual and
indiscreet enquiries.

"I have already told you," he said sternly, "that I receive no one
to-night. Even if Mr. Pargeter himself comes, you are to say that I am
out!"

"I'm afraid Monsieur will have to receive this gentleman."

"Poulain!" exclaimed Vanderlyn sharply. "This won't do! Go at once and
inform this gentleman, whoever he may be, that I can see no one
to-night."

"I did say so," observed Poulain, in an injured tone, "I explained to
him that you would see no one. I said you were out--he said that he
would wait. Then, Monsieur, not till then, he handed me his card. If
Monsieur will give himself the trouble of looking at it, I think he will
receive the gentleman."

Vanderlyn took the card with an impatient movement. He glanced at it.
"Why did you not tell me at once," he said roughly, "who this--this
person was? Of course I must see the Prefect of Police."

More than once, Vanderlyn had had proof of the amazing perfection and
grip of the great, the mysterious organisation, that oligarchy within a
republic, which has always played a paramount role in every section of
Parisian life. The American diplomatist had not lived in France all
these years without unconsciously acquiring an almost superstitious
belief in the omnipotence of the French police.

He got up and placed himself between the lamp and the door. He knew
slightly the formidable official whose presence here surely indicated
some serious development in what had now become a matter of urgent
interest to many quite outside the Pargeter circle.

The two or three moments' delay--doubtless the zealous Poulain was
engaged in helping the important visitor off with his coat--were passed
by Vanderlyn in a state of indescribable nervous tension and suspense.
He was glad when they came to an end.

And yet the Frenchman who came into Vanderlyn's sitting-room, making a
ceremonious bow, would have suggested no formidable or even striking
personality to the eyes of the average Englishman or American. His stout
figure, clad in an ill-cut suit of evening clothes, recalled rather a
Gavarni caricature than a dapper modern official, the more so that his
round, fleshy face was framed in the carefully trimmed mutton-chop
whiskers which remain a distinguishing mark of the more old-fashioned
members of the Parisian Bar. The red button, signifying that its wearer
is an officer of the Legion of Honour, was exceptionally small and
unobtrusive. Vanderlyn was well aware that his visitor was no up-start,
owing promotion to adroit flattery of the Republican powers; the Prefect
of Police came of good bourgeois stock, and was son to a legal luminary
who had played a considerable part in '48. His manner was suave, his
voice almost caressing in its urbanity----

"I have the honour, have I not, of speaking to Mr. Laurence Vanderlyn?"

Vanderlyn bowed; he turned and led the way to the fireplace. "Yes,
Monsieur le Prefet, Laurence Vanderlyn at your service. I think we have
already met, at the Elysee----" he drew forward a second armchair.

Monsieur le Prefet sat down; and for the first time the American
diplomatist noticed that his visitor held a small, black, battered
portfolio in his right hand. As the Frenchman laid it across his knee,
he gave a scarcely perceptible glance round the room; then, at last, his
gaze concentrated itself on the table where stood the lamp, and the
spread-open newspaper.

"You probably divine, Monsieur," said the Prefect, after a short pause,
"what has brought me here to-night. I have come to see you--perhaps I
should say to consult you--in connection with the disappearance of Mrs.
Pargeter."

"Yes?" said Vanderlyn interrogatively, "I am, of course, quite at your
disposal. I have been with Mr. Pargeter all to-day, but so far the
mystery remains as great as ever." He stopped abruptly, feeling it
wisest not to speak, but to listen.

"That, I repeat, is why I have come here," said Vanderlyn's formidable
visitor. He spoke with a great deliberateness and mildness of manner. "I
cannot help thinking, my dear sir, that with your help we may be, or
rather _I_ may be, on the eve of a discovery."

Vanderlyn looked surprised; his desolate eyes met the older man's
hesitating glance quite squarely, but this time he remained silent.

The Prefect went on speaking, and his voice became more and more suave;
he was certainly desirous of saving in every way his host's
susceptibilities.

"The fact that I have taken the very unusual course of coming myself to
see you, Mr. Vanderlyn, will prove to you the importance I attach to
this interview. Indeed, I wish to be quite frank with you----"

Vanderlyn bent his head, and then he sat up, listening keenly while the
other continued----

"This is not, I am convinced, an ordinary case of disappearance, and it
is to us, and especially to me, disagreeably complicated by the fact
that the lady is an English subject and that her husband is a well-known
and highly thought of member of our English colony. This makes me the
more anxious to avoid"--he hesitated, then firmly uttered the two words,
"any scandal. It was suggested at the Prefecture to-day that it would be
well to make a perquisition, not only in Mrs. Pargeter's own house, but
also in the houses of some of her intimates. Mr. Pargeter, as you know,
gave the police every possible facility. Nothing was found in the Villa
Pargeter which could throw any light on Mrs. Pargeter's disappearance.
Now, Monsieur, before subjecting _you_ to such an unpleasant occurrence,
I decided to approach you myself----"

Vanderlyn opened his lips, and then closed them again.

"I have come to ask you, Monsieur, one question, and I give you my word
as an honest man that what you tell me shall be treated as confidential.
I ask you if you know more of this mysterious matter than you are
apparently prepared to divulge? In a word--I beg you to tell me where
Mrs. Pargeter is hiding at the present moment? I have no wish to disturb
her retreat, but I beg you most earnestly to entrust me with the
secret."

Again the speaker's eyes took a discreet journey round the plain, now
shadow-filled room; his glance rested on the book-shelves which formed
so important a part of its decorations, lingered doubtingly on a carved
walnut chest set between two of the windows, peered through these same
unshuttered windows on to the dark stone balconies, then, baffled, his
eyes came back and fixed themselves on the American diplomatist's face.

A feeling of indescribable relief stole over Vanderlyn's wearied and yet
alert senses. It was clear that the Prefect of Police knew nothing of
the truth; the directness of his question proved it. Yet, even so,
Vanderlyn felt that he must steer his way very warily.

"You are in error," he said at last, "for you credit me, Monsieur le
Prefet, with a knowledge I do not possess."

"Ah!" said the other mildly, "that is most unfortunate!"

"May I, on my side, put to you a question to which I should be glad of
an honest answer?" said Vanderlyn abruptly. "Are you now engaged in
making a wide-spread enquiry among those who had the honour of this
lady's acquaintance?"

"No, Monsieur,"--the Prefect's manner showed an eager desire to be quite
frank,--"I am confining my personal enquiries to only two persons; that
is, to a certain Madame de Lera, to whom you will remember Mrs. Pargeter
was about to pay a visit at the moment she disappeared, and to
yourself."

Vanderlyn made a sudden nervous movement, but he checked the words which
rose to his lips, for the Prefect was again speaking, and this time with
a certain excitement of manner.

"I am convinced that Mrs. Pargeter never intended to go to Madame de
Lera, and that the proposed visit was a blind! The facts speak for
themselves. Madame de Lera had taken only one servant to the country,
and this servant, an old woman whom she has had with her many years, and
whom she can entirely trust, had no idea that her mistress was expecting
a visitor! I repeat--that no preparations for Mrs. Pargeter's arrival
had been made at Marly-le-Roi. It is my belief--nay, my conviction--that
Madame de Lera knows perfectly well where her friend is now concealed."

It was then that Vanderlyn committed what was perhaps the only mistake
he was destined to commit during this difficult interview. "Has Madame
de Lera made any such admission?" he asked quickly.

"No," answered the Prefect, looking at him thoughtfully, "Madame de Lera
has made no admission; but then I have learned, through long experience,
never to believe, where there is a friend in the case, what a lady tells
me. Women of the world, my dear sir, are more loyal the one to the other
than we men may choose to believe!"

"And men, Monsieur? Are they more disloyal?" Vanderlyn spoke quietly,
indifferently, as if the question was of no moment.

"Men," said Monsieur le Prefet, dryly, "are as a rule quite as loyal,
especially where they feel their honour is engaged. But with a man it is
possible to reason; a woman, especially a good woman, follows the
dictates of instinct,--in other words, of her heart."

"I notice, Monsieur le Prefet, that you eliminate the possibility of
material accident having occurred to Mrs. Pargeter?"

"Let us distinguish!" exclaimed the older man quickly. "If, by accident,
you mean, Mr. Vanderlyn, the type of mishap which might have occurred to
this lady when she was walking or driving in our Paris streets, then I
certainly eliminate the possibility of accident to Mrs. Pargeter. Within
six hours of such a thing having occurred the facts would have been laid
before me, and, as you know, two nights and two days have elapsed since
her disappearance. If, on the other hand, we envisage the possibility of
suicide, then are opened up a new series of possibilities."

The Prefect gave a piercing look at the American's worn and sorrow-laden
face, but he did not find written there any involuntary answer to his
mute interrogation.

"Some years ago," went on the great official, "a man well known in Paris
society made up his mind to take his own life. He hired a cellar, locked
the door, and then shot himself. Months went by before his disappearance
was accounted for, and then the body was only discovered by an accident.
If Mrs. Pargeter has committed suicide, and if she, an intelligent
woman, was determined that the fact should never be found out by her
friends, then I admit our task becomes a very difficult one! But I do
not believe," he continued, after a short silence, "that Mrs. Pargeter
did this. I believe she is alive, and well. She was, by each account
that has reached me, young, charming, and wealthy. She had a child whom
she apparently adored. As for her relations with her husband----" the
Prefect shrugged his shoulders, and again looked searchingly at
Vanderlyn.

"Mr. Thomas Pargeter," he went on, smiling, "is not perhaps the perfect
husband of whom every young girl dreams; but then no one is so foolish
as to search for the perfect husband in the world to which your friend
belongs! He is not exactly a _viveur_,--but he is, to use the slang of
the day, essentially a _jouisseur_. Is not that so?" He added, with a
rather twisted grin, "If every lady whose husband lives to enjoy himself
were to commit suicide, there would be very few women left in our Paris
world."

"I agree with you, Monsieur le Prefet, in thinking Mrs. Pargeter was the
last woman in the world to commit suicide," said Vanderlyn brusquely,
and then he got up.

There had come over him during the last few moments an inexplicable,
instinctive feeling of dread,--that panting fear which besets the hunted
creature. He was determined to bring to an end the interview. But the
Prefect of Police had no intention of being disposed of so easily. He
remained sitting where he was; and, placing his two fat hands firmly on
his knees, sat looking at the American's tall figure. Slowly his eyes
travelled up till they rested on his host's haggard face.

"Then I am to understand, Mr. Vanderlyn, that you are not in a position
to give me any help? That is your last word?"

Vanderlyn suddenly determined to carry the war into the enemy's country.

"I can only repeat," he said, harshly, "what I said before, Monsieur le
Prefet--namely, that you credit me with a knowledge which I do not
possess. Further, that while, of course, I appreciate the kindly motive
which has inspired your visit, I think I have a right to resent the
suspicions which that visit indicates, I do not say on your part, but on
that of your subordinates. I will not disguise from you my knowledge
that for the last two days every step I have taken has been dogged; I
suspect also, but of that I have no proof, that my servants, and the
concierge of this house, have been questioned as to my movements, as to
my daily life. I cannot help also suspecting--perhaps in this I am
wrong--that the police are inclined to believe that Mrs. Pargeter--a
woman, let me remind you, Monsieur le Prefet, of the highest and most
unspotted character--is hiding here, in my chambers! You speak of having
saved me from a perquisition,--a perquisition in the rooms of a
diplomatist is a serious matter, Monsieur le Prefet, and I tell you
quite frankly that I should have resisted such an outrage in every way
in my power! But now, in the present very peculiar circumstances, I
request,--nay, I demand,--that you should search my rooms. Every
possible facility shall be afforded you." Vanderlyn's voice was shaking
with undisguised anger,--aye, and disgust.

The Prefect of Police rose from his chair.

"I have no wish to subject you to any indignity," he said earnestly, "I
absolutely accept your assurance that Mrs. Pargeter is not in hiding
here. I am aware, Mr. Vanderlyn, that Americans do not lie,"--an ironic
smile wavered for a moment over his large mouth.

Vanderlyn's face remained impassive. "You, on your side, must forgive my
heat," he said, quietly. Then he suddenly determined to play for a high
stake. "May I ask you to satisfy my curiosity on one point? What made
you first suspect such a thing? What led you to--to suppose----"

"----That you knew where this lady was; that she might--say, after a
little misunderstanding with her husband--have taken refuge with you?
Well, yes, Mr. Vanderlyn, I admit that you have a right to ask me this,
and it was because I feared you might lack the exquisite courtesy you
have shown me, that I brought with me to-night a document which
contains, in what I trust you will consider a discreet form, an answer
to your delicate question."

Vanderlyn's visitor again sat down; he laid open on his knee the leather
portfolio, and out of it he took a large sheet of foolscap, which,
unfolding, he handed to Laurence Vanderlyn.

"This, Monsieur, is your _dossier_. If you can prove to me that it is
incorrect in any particular, I will see that the error is rectified. We
naturally take special care in compiling the _dossiers_ of foreign
diplomatists, for experience has shown that these often become of great
value, even after the gentlemen in question have left Paris for some
other capital."

Vanderlyn reddened. He glanced over the odd-looking document with eager,
curious eyes. A few words here and there were printed, but the rest of
the _dossier_ was written in the round copying character which must be
mastered by every French Government clerk hoping for promotion.

First came the American diplomatist's Christian name and surname, his
place of birth, his probable age--right within two years,--a short
epitome of his diplomatic career, a guess at his income, this item
considerably under the right figure, and evidently based on his quiet
way of living.

Then, under a printed heading "General Remarks," were written a few
phrases in a handwriting very different from the rest--that is, in the
small clear caligraphy of an educated Frenchman. Staring down at these,
Vanderlyn felt shaken with anger and disgust, for these "General
Remarks" concerned that part of his private life which every man
believes to be hidden from his fellows:--

"Peu d'intimites d'hommes. Pas de femmes: par contre, une amitie
amoureuse tres suivie avec Madame (Marguerite) Pargeter. Voir dossier
Pargeter (Thomas)."

Amitie amoureuse? Friendship akin to love? The English language, so rich
in synonyms, owns no exact equivalent for this French phrase, expressive
though it be of a phase of human emotion as old as human nature itself.

Vanderlyn looked up. His eyes met squarely those of the other man.

"Your staff," he said, very quietly, "have served you well, Monsieur; my
_dossier_ is, on the whole, extraordinarily correct. There is but one
word which I would have altered, and which, indeed, I venture to beg you
to correct without loss of time. The young man--he is evidently a young
man--who wrote the summary to which you have drawn my attention, must
have literary tastes, otherwise there is one word in this document which
would not be there." Vanderlyn put his finger down firmly on the word
"amoureuse." "My relations with Mrs. Pargeter were, it is true, those of
close friendship, but I must ask you to accept my assurance, Monsieur le
Prefet, that they were not what the writer of this passage evidently
believed them to have been."

"I will make a note of the correction," said the Prefect, gravely, "and
I must offer you my very sincere excuses for having troubled you
to-night."

As Vanderlyn's late visitor drove home that night, he said to himself,
indeed he said aloud to the walls of the shabby little carriage which
had heard so many important secrets, "He knows whatever there is to be
known--but, then, what is it that is to be known? Of what mystery am I
now seeking the solution?"




IX.


As he heard the door shut on the Prefect of Police, Vanderlyn felt his
nerve give way. There had come a moment during the conversation, when,
as if urged by some malignant power outside himself, he had felt a
sudden craving to take the old official into his confidence, and tell
him the whole truth--so magnetic were the personality, the compelling
will, of the man who had just left him.

He walked over to the corner window of his sitting-room, and stepped
onto the stone balcony which overlooked the twinkling lights of the
Place de la Concorde.

Then, flung out, merged in the deep roar below, there broke from
Laurence Vanderlyn a bitter cry; the keen night air had brought with it
a sudden memory of that moment when he had opened the railway carriage
door and stepped out into the rushing wind.... He asked himself why he
had not followed his first impulse, why he had not allowed himself to
die, with Peggy in his arms? Why, above all, had he undertaken a task
which it was becoming beyond his strength to carry through?

So wondering, so questioning, he leaned over the balustrade dangerously
far; then he drew quickly back, and placing his hands on the parapet,
stood for a moment as if holding at bay an invisible, yet to himself
most tangible, enemy.

With a sigh which was a groan, he walked back into the room. He had
never yet failed Peggy; he would not fail her now----

Vanderlyn sat down; he was determined not to be beaten by his nerves. He
took up the _New York Herald_; but a moment later he had laid the paper
down again on the table. What had been going on in America a week ago
could not compel his attention. He took another paper off the table; it
was the London _Daily Telegraph_, of which one of the most successful
features for many years has been a column entitled "Paris Day by
Day,"--an _olla podrida_ of news, grave and gay, domestic and
sensational, put together with infinite art, and a full understanding of
what is likely to appeal to the British middle-class reader. There, as
Vanderlyn knew well, was certain to be some reference to the
disappearance of Mrs. Pargeter.

Yes--here it was!

"No trace of Mrs. Pargeter, the wife of the well-known sportsman and
owner of Absinthe, has yet been found; but the lady's relations think it
possible that she went unexpectedly to stay with some friends, and that
the letter informing her household of her whereabouts has miscarried."

The Paris correspondent of the great London newspaper had proved himself
very discreet.

Vanderlyn's eyes glanced idly down the long column of paragraphs which
make up "Paris Day by Day." Again he remembered the look of deep
astonishment which had crossed a colleague's face at his ignorance of
some new sensation of which at that moment all Paris was apparently
talking. So it was that he applied himself to read the trifling items of
news with some care, for here would be found everything likely to keep
him in touch with the gossip of the day.

At last he came to the final paragraph--

"Yet another railway mystery! The dead body of a woman has been found in
a first-class compartment in a train which left Paris at 7 P. M. last
Wednesday. As the discovery was not made till the train reached Orange,
it is, of course, impossible to know where the unfortunate woman, who,
by her dress, belonged to the leisured class, entered the train. Her
hand baggage had disappeared, no doubt stolen at some intervening
station by someone who, having made the gruesome discovery, thought it
wise to make himself scarce. The police do not, however, consider that
they are in the presence of a crime. Dr. Fortoul, the well-known
physician of Orange, has satisfied himself that the lady died of heart
disease."

Vanderlyn went on staring down at the printed words. They seemed to make
more true, more inevitable, the fact of Margaret Pargeter's death, and
of his own awful loss.

But with the agony of this thought came infinite relief, for this, or so
he thought, meant that his own personal ordeal was at last drawing to a
close. The fact of so strange and unwonted an occurrence as the finding
of a woman's dead body in a train, would surely be at once connected by
the trained intellects of the Paris Police with the disappearance of
Mrs. Pargeter.

He let the paper fall to the ground and began to think intently. When
that came to pass, as it certainly must do within the next few hours, it
would become his grim business to persuade Tom Pargeter that the clue
was one worth following. The mystery solved, the question of how
Margaret Pargeter came to be travelling in the demi-rapide would be
comparatively unimportant--at any rate not a point which such a man as
Tom Pargeter would give himself much trouble to clear up.

Then with some uneasiness he remembered that before such an item of news
could have found its way into an English newspaper, the fact must have
been known to the French police for at least twelve hours. If that were
so, their acumen was not as great as that with which Vanderlyn credited
them.

But stay! The Prefect of Police was convinced that Mrs. Pargeter was
alive, and that he, Vanderlyn, knew her whereabouts; it was not for
Peggy dead, but for Peggy living, that they were still searching so
eagerly.

He opened the _Figaro_ and the _Petit Journal_, and ran a shaking finger
down the columns; there, in each paper, hidden away among unimportant
items, and told more briefly and in much balder language, he at last
found the story of the discovery which the _Daily Telegraph_ had served
up as a tit-bit to thrill the readers of its Paris news columns.

Vanderlyn made up his mind to spend the whole of the next day with
Pargeter; he must be at the villa, ready to put in his word of
advice,--even, if need be, of suggestion,--when the moment came for him
to do so.

For the first time for many nights Vanderlyn's sleep was unbroken; and
early the next morning he made his way to the Avenue du Bois de
Boulogne.

As he walked through the hall of the villa, already peopled with a score
of the Pargeters' acquaintances, eager to show their sympathy with the
wealthy sportsman in this most untoward and extraordinary occurrence,
the American was obliged to shake hands with many men whom he had
hitherto only known by sight, and to answer questions some of which
impressed him as strangely indiscreet. More than one of those with whom
he found himself thus face to face looked at him with cruel, inquisitive
eyes, and a scarcely veiled curiosity, for it was of course well known
that Laurence Vanderlyn had been an intimate, not only of the husband,
but also of the wife.

At last Pargeter's valet threaded his way up to him: "Will you please
come upstairs, sir? Mr. Pargeter told me to say that he would be glad if
you would go to his dressing-room as soon as you arrived."

"There's no news, Grid,--no news at all! It's getting awful, isn't
it?--quite beyond a joke! You know what I mean--I'm sick of answering
stupid questions. I was waked this morning at seven--had to see a man in
bed! They don't seem to understand that I can tell them nothing beyond
the bare fact that she's vanished; they actually sent two women here
last night----"

"Two women?" echoed Vanderlyn. "What sort of women?"

"Ugly old hags," said Pargeter, briefly, "from the Prefecture of Police.
They brought an impudent letter asking me to allow them to turn out
Peggy's room and look over all her things! But I refused----" he looked
at his friend for sympathy--and found it.

"You were quite right," said Vanderlyn quickly. His face became rigid
with anger and disgust. "Quite right, Tom! Whatever made them think of
suggesting such a thing? Where would be the use of it?"

"Oh! well, of course they had a reason. The police are particularly keen
that we should look over any old letters of hers; they think that we
might find some kind of clue. But I don't believe she kept her
letters--why should she? I don't keep mine. However, I've promised to do
the job myself----" he looked uncertainly at Vanderlyn. "Would you mind,
Grid, coming with me into Peggy's room? Of course Plimmer, that's her
maid, you know, will help us. She knows where Peggy keeps all her
things."

"Why not ask Madame de Lera to do it?" said Vanderlyn, in a low voice.

He turned away and stared at a sporting print which hung just on the
level of his eyes. Had he ever written imprudent letters to Peggy? Not
lately, but in the early days,--in that brief time of uncertain ecstasy,
and, on his part, of passionate expression, which had preceded their
long successful pretence at friendship? He himself had preserved later
letters of hers--not love-letters assuredly, but letters which proved
clearly enough the strange closeness of their intimacy.

But what was this that Pargeter was saying? "Madame de Lera? Why should
I ask her to interfere? I don't want to mix her up in this business more
than I can help! If it hadn't been for her--and that ridiculous
invitation of hers, Peggy would be here now! Peggy wouldn't mind your
looking over her things, Grid. She's really fond of you--as fond of you
as she can be of anyone, that is."

He got up, and, preceding Vanderlyn down a connecting passage, flung
open the door giving access to a spacious airy bedchamber of which the
pale mauve and grey furnishings reminded both men of Peggy's favourite
flower and scent. The sun-blinds were down and the maid was standing, as
if waiting for them, by the dressing-table.

They both instinctively hesitated on the threshold. "Tom," said
Vanderlyn, hoarsely, "I don't think I ought to come in here----"

"Don't be a fool! I tell you she wouldn't mind a bit. Surely you're not
going to cut--now?"

Pargeter took a step forward; then he stood for a moment looking round
him, evidently perplexed, and ill at ease at finding himself thus
suddenly introduced into his wife's intimate atmosphere.

"I don't believe she kept any letters," he repeated, then glanced
uncertainly at the lady's-maid who stood primly by.

"Mrs. Pargeter kept some letters in that writing-desk over there,
sir,--at least I think she did."

Close to the small tent-bed stood an old-fashioned rosewood davenport, a
relic of Margaret Pargeter's childhood and girlhood, brought from her
distant English home.

The maid waited for a moment, and then added, "The desk is locked, sir."

"Locked? Then did Mrs. Pargeter take her keys with her?"

"I suppose she did, sir."

"Then it's no use," said Pargeter, with a certain relief, "I don't want
to force the thing open."

Vanderlyn looked across, coldly and steadily, at the woman. Her
expression struck him as oddly enigmatical; meeting his glance, Plimmer
reddened, her eyes dropped. "I expect any simple key would open it," he
said, briefly.

"Well, sir, I did ask the housekeeper to lend me a bunch of keys. Here
they are," she opened one of the dressing-table drawers. "Perhaps one of
the smaller ones would fit the lock."

It was Vanderlyn who took the keys from her strangely reluctant hand,
and it was he who at last felt the old-fashioned lock yield.

"Now, Pargeter," he said, sharply, "will you please come over here?"

The whole of the inside of the desk was filled with neat packets, each
carefully tied up and docketed; on several had been written, "In the
case of my death, to be burnt;" on other packets, "To be returned to
Madame de Lera in case of my death."

Vanderlyn saw that here at least were none of his letters, and none from
Peggy's child.

"It's no use bothering about any of these," said Pargeter, crossly,
"they can't tell us anything. Why anyone should trouble to keep old
letters is quite beyond me!"

"That little knob that you see there, sir," said Plimmer, in her
diffident, well-trained voice, "is the head of a brass pin; if you draw
it out, sir, it releases the side drawer. I think you will find more
letters there,--at least that is where Master Jasper's letters are, I
know."

She looked furtively at Vanderlyn, and her look said, "If you want to
have the truth you shall have it!"

"I say, how queer!" exclaimed Pargeter. "A secret drawer! eh, Grid?"

"All old pieces of furniture have that kind of thing," said Vanderlyn,
"there isn't any secret about it."

Pargeter fumbled at the brass-headed pin; he pulled it out, and a drawer
which filled up the side of the davenport shot out. Yes, here were more
packets inscribed with the words, "Jasper's letters, written at school,"
and then others, "To be returned to Laurence Vanderlyn in case of my
death;" and two or three loose letters.

"Well, these won't tell us anything, eh, Grid?" Pargeter opened the
first envelope under his hand:--

     "Dear Mammy," (he read slowly),

     "Please send me ten shillings. I have finished the French
     cherry-jam. I should like some more. Also some horses made of
     gingerbread. I have laid 3 to 1 on Absinthe. Betting is forbidden,
     but as it was Dad's horse I thought I might. My bat is the best in
     the school.

    "Your loving
    "Jasper."

"He's a fine little chap, isn't he, Grid?" Pargeter was fingering
absently a yellowing packet of Vanderlyn's letters: "Fancy keeping your
old letters! What a queer thing to do!"

Vanderlyn said nothing. The maid stared at him stealthily.

At last Pargeter put the packet down, and deliberately opened yet
another envelope which lay loose. "I suppose this is the last note you
wrote to her?" he said, then, opening it, murmured its contents over to
himself:--

     "Dear Peggy,

     "I hear the show at the Gardinets is worth seeing. I'll call for
     you at two to-morrow.

    Yours sincerely,
    "L. V."

"Well, it's no use our wasting any more time here, is it? We'd better go
downstairs and have a smoke. Why--why, Grid!--what's the matter?"

"It's nothing," said Vanderlyn, roughly, "I'll be all right in a minute
or two----"

"I don't wonder you're upset," said the other, moodily. "But just think
what it must be for _me_. I can't stand much more of it. It's been
simply awful since Peggy's brother and that cousin of hers arrived. They
treat me as if I were a murderer! They're at the Prefecture of Police
now, making what they're pleased to call their own enquiries."

They had left Peggy's room, and as he spoke Pargeter was leading the way
down a staircase which led into his smoking-room.

Once there, he shut the door and came and stood close by Vanderlyn.

"Grid," he said, lowering his voice, "I've been wondering--don't you
think it would be a good plan if I were to go and see that
fortune-teller of mine, Madame d'Elphis? I don't mind telling you that
I'd a shot at her yesterday evening, but she was away. She does
sometimes make mistakes, but still, she's a kind of Providence to me. I
never do anything important--I mean at the stables--without consulting
her."

Vanderlyn looked at the eager face, the odd twinkling green and blue
eyes, with scarcely concealed surprise and contempt.

"Surely you don't think she could tell you where--what's happened to
Peggy?" he said incredulously.

"If I could have seen her last night," went on Pargeter, "I'd have got
away to England to-day. There's no object in my staying here; _I_ can't
help them to find Peggy. But La d'Elphis won't see me before to-morrow
morning. If she can't clear up the mystery nobody can. I'm beginning to
think, Grid"--he came close up to the other man,--"that something must
have happened to her. I'm beginning to feel--worried!"




X.


An hour later Vanderlyn had escaped from Pargeter, and was standing
alone in Madame de Lera's drawing-room.

He was scarcely conscious of how many hours he had spent during the last
terrible three days, with the middle-aged Frenchwoman who had been so
true and sure a friend of Margaret Pargeter. In Madame de Lera's
presence alone was he able, to a certain extent, to drop the mask which
he was compelled to wear in the presence of all others, and especially
in that of the man who, as time went on, seemed more and more to lean on
him and find comfort in his companionship.

Vanderlyn had walked the considerable distance from the Avenue du Bois
to the quiet street near the Luxembourg where Adele de Lera lived, and
all the way he had felt as if pursued by a mocking demon.

How much longer, so he asked himself, was his awful ordeal to endure?
The moments spent by him and Pargeter in Peggy's room had racked heart
and memory. He now fled to Madame de Lera as to a refuge from himself.

And yet? Yet he never looked round her pretty sitting-room, with its
faded, rather austere furnishings, without being vividly reminded of the
woman he had loved and whom he had now lost, for it was there that Peggy
had spent the most peaceful hours of her life since Pargeter had first
decided that henceforth they should live in Paris.

       *       *       *       *       *

At last Madame de Lera came into the room; she gave her visitor a quick
questioning look. "Have you nothing new to tell?" she asked.

And, after a moment of scarcely perceptible hesitation, Vanderlyn
answered, "I have nothing new to tell," but as they both sat down, as he
saw how sad and worn the kind face had become in the last three days,
there came over him a strong wish to confide in her--to tell her the
whole truth. He longed, with morbid longing, to share his knowledge.
She, after all, was the only human being who knew the story of his
tragic, incomplete love. It would be an infinite comfort and relief to
tell her, if not everything, then at least of the irony, the
uselessness, of their present search.

Since last night the secret no longer seemed to be his alone.

But Vanderlyn resisted the temptation. He had no right to cast even half
his burden on another. Any moment the odious experience which had, it
seemed, already befallen Madame de Lera might be repeated. She might
again be cross-questioned by the police. In that event it was essential
that she should be still able truthfully to declare that she knew
nothing.

"I have just come from Tom Pargeter," he observed quietly. "I can't help
being sorry for him. The police have been worrying him, and--and at
their suggestion we have been seeking among her things--among her
correspondence--for some clue. But of course we found nothing. Pargeter
is longing to go away--to England. How I wish he would go,--God! how I
wish he would go! After all, as he says himself, he can do no good by
staying here. He would receive any news within an hour."

Madame de Lera leant forward. "Ah! but if Mr. Pargeter leaves Paris
before--before something is discovered, his conduct would be regarded as
very cruel--very heartless."

"Did you know," said Vanderlyn, in a low voice, "that Peggy once before
disappeared for three days? Pargeter keeps harking back to that. He
thinks that she found out something which made her leave him again."

"Yes," said Madame de Lera, "I knew of that episode in their early
married life--but on that occasion, Mr. Vanderlyn, our poor friend
cannot be said to have disappeared--she only returned to her own
family."

"Why, having once escaped, did she ever go back to him?" asked
Vanderlyn, sombrely.

"You forget," said Madame de Lera, gently, "that even then there was her
son."

Her son? Nay, Vanderlyn at no moment ever forgot Peggy's child. To
himself, he seemed to be the only human being who ever thought of the
poor little boy lying ill in far-away England.

"Well, you need not be afraid," he said quickly, "that Pargeter will go
away to-day. He intends to stay in Paris at least till to-morrow night,
for he is convinced, it seems, that the fortune-teller, Madame
d'Elphis,--the woman who by some incredible stroke of luck stumbled on
the right name of that horse of his which won the Oaks,--will be able to
tell him what has happened to--to Margaret Pargeter."

And, meeting Madame de Lera's troubled gaze, he added in a low bitter
tone, "How entirely that gives one the measure of the man,--the absurd
notion, I mean, that a fortune-teller can solve the mystery! Fortunately
or unfortunately, this Madame d'Elphis has been away for two or three
days, but she will be back, it seems, in time to give Pargeter, who is a
favoured client, an appointment to-morrow morning."

Adele de Lera suddenly rose from her chair; with a nervous movement she
clasped her hands together.

"Ah, but that must not happen!" she exclaimed. "We must think of a way
by which we can prevent an interview between Mr. Pargeter and La
d'Elphis! Unless," she concluded slowly, "there is no serious reason why
he should not know the truth--now?"

Vanderlyn also got up. A look of profound astonishment came over his
face.

"The truth?" he repeated. "But surely, Madame de Lera, it is impossible
that this woman whom Pargeter is going to consult to-morrow morning can
have any clue to the truth! Surely you do not seriously believe----" he
did not conclude his sentence. That this broad-minded and religious
Frenchwoman could possibly cherish any belief in the type of charlatan
to which the American diplomatist supposed the famous Paris
fortune-teller to belong was incredible to him.

"I beg of you most earnestly," she repeated, in a deeply troubled voice,
"to prevent any meeting between Mr. Pargeter and Madame d'Elphis!
Believe me, I do not speak without reason; I know more of this
soothsayer and her mysterious powers than you can possibly know----"

"Do you mean me to understand that you yourself would ever consult such
an oracle?" Vanderlyn could not keep a certain contemptuous incredulity
out of his voice.

"No, indeed! But then I, unlike you, believe this woman's traffic to be
of the devil. Listen, Mr. Vanderlyn, and I will tell you of a case in
which La d'Elphis was closely concerned--a case of which I have absolute
knowledge."

Madame de Lera went back to her chair; she sank into it, and, with
Vanderlyn standing before her, she told him the story.

"If you cast back your mind to the time when you were first in Paris,
you will probably recall my husband's niece, a beautiful girl named
Jeanne de Lera?" Vanderlyn bent his head without speaking; nay more, a
look of pain came over his tired face, and sunken eyes, for, strangely
enough, there was a certain sinister parallel between the fate which had
befallen the charming girl whose image was thus suddenly brought up
before him, and that of the beloved woman who seemed to be now even more
present to his emotional memory than she had been in life.

"As you know, for it was no secret, Jeanne had what English and American
people call 'flirted' with Henri Delavigne, and he had sworn that he
would kill himself on her wedding-day. Well, the poor foolish girl took
this threat very seriously; it shadowed her happy betrothal, and on the
very day before her marriage was to take place, she persuaded her
married sister to go with her to a fortune-teller. It was not her own
future, which stretched cloudless and radiant before her, that tempted
Jeanne to peer into these mysteries; she only wished to be reassured as
to Delavigne and his absurd threat----"

Madame de Lera stopped speaking a moment, and then she went on--

"Madame d'Elphis had just then become the rage, and so Jeanne decided to
consult her, although the woman charged a higher fee than, I understand,
the other fortune-tellers were then doing. When the two sisters found
themselves there, my married niece bargained that the seance should be
half-price, as Jeanne only wished to stay a very few minutes, and to ask
but one question. After the bargain was concluded, Jeanne, it seems,
observed--the story of the interview has been told to me, and before me,
many many times--that she hoped the fortune-teller would take as much
trouble as if she had paid the full fee. On this the woman replied, with
a rather malignant smile, 'I can assure Mademoiselle that she will have
plenty for her money!'

"Then began the seance. La d'Elphis gave, as those sorts of people
always do, a marvellously accurate account of the poor child's
past,--the simple, virginal past of a very young girl,--but when it came
to the future, she declared that her vision had become blurred, and that
she could see nothing! Nothing! Nothing! Both the sisters pressed her to
say more, to predict something of the future; and at last, speaking very
reluctantly, she admitted that she saw Jeanne, pale, deathly pale, clad
in a wedding-dress, and she also evoked a wonderful vision of white
flowers...."

Madame de Lera looked up at her visitor, but Vanderlyn made no comment;
and so she went on:--

"Then, with some confusion, Jeanne summoned up courage to ask the one
question she had come there to ask. The answer came at once, and was
more than reassuring: 'As to the man concerning whom you are so
anxious,' said Madame d'Elphis, 'you may count on his fidelity. The
years will go on and others who loved you will forget you--but he will
ever remember.' 'Then nothing will happen to him to-morrow?' asked
Jeanne eagerly. 'To-morrow?' replied the woman, mysteriously, 'To-morrow
I see him plunged in deep grief, and yet that which has brought him this
awful sorrow will not perhaps be wholly regretted by him.'

"My poor little niece, if rather piqued, was yet much relieved, and the
two sisters left the presence of this horrible, sinister creature."

Madame de Lera passed her hand with a nervous movement over her
mouth--"It was while they were actually driving home from this seance
with La d'Elphis that the terrible accident, which you of course
remember, occurred,--an accident which resulted in the younger sister's
death, while the elder miraculously escaped unhurt. Jeanne was buried in
her wedding-dress--and the flowers--you recall the wonderful flowers?
The woman's predictions as to Delavigne's constancy came strangely true;
who now remembers Jeanne, save her poor mother--and Delavigne?"

"Yes, it's a very curious, striking story," said Vanderlyn, slowly,
"but--forgive me for saying so--if your niece's marriage had taken place
on the morrow, would anything of all this have been remembered by either
herself or her sister? The predictions of Madame d'Elphis were of a kind
which it would be safe to make of any French girl, belonging to your
world, on the eve of her marriage----"

He stopped abruptly. In his wearied and yet morbidly active mind, an
idea, a suggestion, of which he was half-ashamed, was beginning to
germinate.

"I should be grateful," he said, slowly, "if you can tell me something
more about La d'Elphis. I am quite sure that I shall not be able to
prevent an interview between her and Pargeter,--but still something
might be done--Is she respectable? Can she, for example,"--his eyes
dropped,--"be bribed?"

Madame de Lera looked at Vanderlyn keenly. Perhaps she saw farther into
his mind than an American or an Englishwoman would have done.

"All these sorts of people can be bribed," she said, quietly. "As to her
private life, I know nothing of it, but either of my nephews would be
able to tell you whatever is known of her, for since that tragic affair
our family have always taken a morbid interest in La d'Elphis. Would you
like to know something about her now, at once? Shall I send for my
nephew?"

In answer to Vanderlyn's look, rather than to his muttered assent,
Madame de Lera left the room.

During the few moments of her absence, a plan began to elaborate itself
with insistent clearness in Vanderlyn's mind; he saw, or thought he saw,
that here might be an issue out of his terrible dilemma. And yet, even
while so seeing the way become clear before him, he felt a deep,
instinctive repugnance from the method which would have to be
employed....

There came the sound of footsteps, and, turning his back to the window,
he prepared himself for the inevitable question with which, during the
last three days, almost everyone he met had greeted him.

But the youth who came into the room with Madame de Lera, if a typical
Parisian in the matter of his careful, rather foppish, dress, and in his
bored expression, yet showed that he was possessed of the old-fashioned
good breeding which is still to be found in France, if only in that
peculiar section of French society known collectively as "the faubourg."
Jacques de Lera, alone among the many men whom Vanderlyn had come across
since the disappearance of Mrs. Pargeter had become the talk of the
town, made no allusion to the mystery, and asked no puerile question of
the man who was known to be her friend.

"Mr. Vanderlyn has been asking me what I knew of the fortune-teller,
Madame d'Elphis. But, beyond the story concerning your poor cousin
Jeanne, I know nothing. You, Jacques, will doubtless be able to tell us
something of her. Is it true, for instance, that she is sometimes
employed by the police? I seem to have heard so--not lately, but long
ago?"

"They say so," said Jacques de Lera, casting a quick glance at
Vanderlyn. "They say she helped to catch Pranzini. Extraordinary stories
are told of her gifts. But none of us have ever been at all anxious to
consult her--after poor Jeanne's affair. You may have seen her,"--he
turned to Vanderlyn,--"for she's sometimes at first nights and at
private views. She's by way of being artistic and cultivated; and though
she's strikingly handsome, she dresses oddly--poses as a Muse."

"She must make a great deal of money," said Madame de Lera,
thoughtfully; with a half smile she asked her nephew the question: "Is
there a Monsieur d'Elphis? Are there infant oracles?"

Jacques burst out laughing, and both Vanderlyn and Madame de Lera
started. It was the first time for many days that they had heard the
sound of simple human laughter.

"My dear aunt," said the young man, chuckling, "the husband--_qua_
husband--is, I assure you, an unknown animal in that strange underworld
of which our beautiful city is the chosen Mecca. No, no, Madame d'Elphis
does not waste her time in producing little oracles! If you wish to hear
the truth, I mean the whole truth, I will tell it you."

And then, as Madame de Lera nodded her head, he added, more seriously,
"La d'Elphis is one of two sisters, the daughters of a very respectable
notary at Orange. Both threw their caps over the windmill, the one to
become an unsuccessful actress, the other a successful soothsayer. La
d'Elphis has one virtue--she is a devoted sister, and lives with the
other's _smalah_. As to her own private life, she has been for many
years the friend of Achille de Florac. She became acquainted with him
not long before his final crash; who knows, perhaps she helped to
precipitate it! It is to be hoped she did, for since then he has
practically lived on her. And so, my dear aunt, she is in a sense our
cousin _de la main gauche_!"

Vanderlyn looked away from Madame de Lera. He was sorry the young man
had been so frank, for the Marquis de Florac was not only by birth a
member of her circle, but he was, as Jacques rather cruelly pointed out,
a connection of the de Lera family.

"Poor creature!" exclaimed Adele de Lera; her voice was filled with
involuntary pity.

"Yes," continued Jacques, in answer to her look, "you may well say 'poor
creature!' For it's from La d'Elphis that our disreputable cousin draws
the major part of his uncertain revenues. When Paris is credulous, his
credit goes up, and he has plenty of money to play with. I'm told that
the other night he lost ten thousand francs at 'Monaco Junior'!"

Vanderlyn made a slight movement. "Yes," he said, "that is true,--I was
there."

"In the lean months," continued Jacques, who did not often find his
conversation listened to with such respect and attention as was now the
case, "I mean, of course, in the summer--poor Florac has to retrench,
but La d'Elphis does not remain idle. She goes to Aix, to Vichy, to
Dieppe for the Grande Semaine,--in fact, wherever rich foreigners
gather; and wherever she goes she finds plenty eager to consult her!"

"Is that all you wanted to know?" said Madame de Lera to Vanderlyn.

"Yes," he said, slowly, "that is all. I did not know--I had no
idea--that our poor old world was still so credulous!"




XI.


As Vanderlyn walked away from Madame de Lera's door, the plan, of which
the first outline had come to him while she was telling the strange
story concerning the fortune-teller and her niece, had taken final
shape; and it now impressed itself upon him as the only way out of his
terrible dilemma.

Vanderlyn was by nature a truthful man, and in spite of the ambiguous
nature of his relations with Margaret Pargeter, he had never been
compelled to lie in defence of their friendship. Even during these last
few days, he had as far as was possible avoided untruth, and only to one
person, that is, to the Prefect of Police, had he lied--lied
desperately, and lied successfully. This was why, even while telling
himself that he had at last found a way in which to convey the truth to
Pargeter, he felt a deep repugnance from the methods which he saw he
would be compelled to employ.

More than once the American diplomatist had had occasion to take part in
delicate negotiations with one of those nameless, countryless
individuals, whose ideal it is to be in the pay of a foreign Embassy,
and who always set on their ignoble services a far higher value than
those services generally deserve. But Vanderlyn belonged to the type of
man who finds it far easier to fight for others, and especially for his
country, than for himself. Still, in this case, was he not fighting for
Margaret Pargeter? For what he knew she valued far more than life
itself--her honour. What he was about to do was hateful to him--he was
aware how severely he would have judged such conduct in another--but it
seemed the only way, a way made miraculously possible by the
superstitious folly of Tom Pargeter.

The offer Vanderlyn was about to convey to Madame d'Elphis was quite
simple; in exchange for saying a very few words to Tom Pargeter,--words
which would add greatly to the belief the millionaire already possessed
in what he took to be her extraordinary gifts of divination,--the
soothsayer would receive ten thousand francs.

There need be no difficulty even as to the words she should use to
reveal the truth; Vanderlyn had cut out from the _Petit Journal_ the
paragraph which told of the strange discovery made three nights before
at Orange. He would inform her that Mr. Pargeter's friends, having
assured themselves that the unknown woman in question was Mrs. Pargeter,
desired to break the sad news through her, instead of in a more
commonplace fashion.

Vanderlyn knew enough of that curious underworld of Paris which preys on
wealthy foreigners, to feel sure that this would not be the first time
that Madame d'Elphis had been persuaded, in her own interest, to add the
agreeable ingredient of certainty to one of her predictions. The
diplomatist also believed he could carry through the negotiation without
either revealing his identity, or giving the soothsayer any clue to his
reason for making her so strange a proposal.

Having made his plan, Vanderlyn found it remarkably easy to carry out.

In London, such a man as himself would have found it difficult to have
ascertained at a moment's notice the address of even a famous palmist or
fortune-teller. But in everything to do with social life Paris is highly
organised, London singularly chaotic.

On reaching home, he at once discovered, with a certain bitter
amusement, that Madame d'Elphis disdained the artifices with which she
might reasonably have surrounded her mysterious craft. Not only were her
name, address, and even hours of consultation, to be found in the "Tout
Paris," but there also was inscribed her telephone number.

Vanderlyn hated the telephone. He never used it unless he was compelled
to do so; but now he went through the weary, odious preliminaries with a
certain eagerness--"Alo! Alo! Alo!"

At last a woman's voice answered, "Yes--yes. Who is it?"

"Can Madame d'Elphis receive a client this evening?"

There was a pause. Then he heard a question asked, a murmured answer of
which the sense evaded him, and then a refusal,--not, he fancied, a very
decided refusal,--followed by a discreet attempt to discover his name,
his nationality, his address, with a suggestion that Madame d'Elphis
would be at his disposal the next morning.

A touch of doubt in the quick, hesitating accents of the unseen woman
emboldened Vanderlyn. He conveyed, civilly and clearly, that he was
quite prepared to offer a very special fee for the favour he was asking;
and he indicated that, though he had been told the usual price of a
seance was fifty francs, he--the mysterious stranger who was speaking to
Madame d'Elphis through the telephone--was so exceedingly anxious to be
received by her that evening that he would pay a fancy fee,--in fact as
much as a thousand francs,--for the privilege of consulting the famous
fortune-teller.

To Vanderlyn's vexation and surprise, there followed a long pause.

At last came the answer, the expected assent; but it was couched in
words which surprised and vaguely disquieted him.

"Very well, sir, my sister will be ready to receive you at eight o'clock
to-night; but she is going out, so she will not be able to give you a
prolonged seance."

Then he had not been speaking to the soothsayer herself? Vanderlyn felt
vaguely disquieted and discomfited. He had counted on having to take but
one person into his half-confidence; and then--well, he had told himself
while at the telephone that he would not find it difficult to conclude
the bargain he desired to make with the woman whose highly-pitched,
affected voice had given him, or so he had thought, the clue to a venal
personality.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was with a feeling of considerable excitement and curiosity that the
diplomatist, that same evening, walked up the quiet, now deserted,
streets where dwelt the most famous of Parisian fortune-tellers.

Madame d'Elphis had chosen a prosaic setting for the scene of her
mysteries, for the large white house looked very new, a huge wedge of
modern ugliness in the pretty old street, its ugliness made the more
apparent by its proximity to one of those leafy gardens which form oases
of fragrant stillness in the more ancient quarters of the town.

A curt answer was given by the concierge in reply to Vanderlyn's enquiry
for Madame d'Elphis. "Walk through the courtyard; the person you seek
occupies the entresol of the house you will see there."

And then he saw that lying back, quite concealed from the street, was
another and very different type of dwelling, and one far more suited to
the requirements of even a latter-day soothsayer.

As he made his way over the dimly-lighted, ill-paved court which
separated the new building, that giving onto the street, from the
seventeenth-century mansion, Vanderlyn realised that his first
impression had been quite erroneous. Madame d'Elphis had evidently
gauged, and that very closely, the effect she desired to produce on her
patrons. Even in the daytime the mansarded house which now gloomed
before him must look secret, mysterious. Behind such narrow latticed
windows might well have dwelt Cagliostro, or, further back, the more
sinister figure of La Voison.

But something of this feeling left him as he passed through the door
which gave access to the old house; and, as he began to walk up the
shabby gas-lit staircase, he felt that his repugnant task would be an
easy one. The woman who, living here, allowed herself the luxury of such
a lover as was the Marquis de Florac, would not--nay, could
not--hesitate before such an offer as ten thousand francs.

There was but one door on the entresol, and on its panel was inscribed
in small gold letters the word "d'Elphis." As Vanderlyn rang the bell,
the odd name gleamed at him in the gas-light.

There followed a considerable delay, but at last he saw a face peering
at him through the little grating--significantly styled a _Judas_, and
doubtless dating from the Revolution,--still to be found in many an
old-fashioned Parisian front-door.

The inspection having apparently proved satisfactory, the door opened,
and Vanderlyn was admitted, by a young _bonne a tout faire_, into a hall
filled with a strong smell of cooking, a smell that made it clear that
Madame d'Elphis and her family--her _smalah_, as Jacques de Lera had
called them--had the true Southern love of garlic.

Without asking his name or business, the servant showed him straight
into a square, gold-and-white salon. Standing there, forgetful for a
moment of his distasteful errand, Vanderlyn looked about him with
mingled contempt and disgust, for his eyes, trained to observe, had at
once become aware that the note of this room was showy vulgarity. The
furniture was a mixture of imitation Louis XV. and sham Empire. On the
woven tapestry sofa lay a child's toy, once costly, but now broken.

How amazing the fact that here, amid these pretentiously ugly and
commonplace surroundings, innumerable human beings had stood, and would
stand, trembling with fear, suspense, and hope! Vanderlyn reminded
himself that here also Tom Pargeter, a man accustomed to measure
everything by the money standard, had waited many a time in the sure
belief that this was the ante-chamber to august and awe-inspiring
mysteries; here, all unknowing of what the future held, he would come
to-morrow morning, to learn, for once, the truth--the terrible
truth--from the charlatan to whom he, poor fool, pinned his faith.

Suddenly a door opened, and Vanderlyn turned round with eager curiosity,
a curiosity which became merged in astonishment. The woman advancing
towards him made her vulgar surroundings sink into blurred
insignificance; for Madame d'Elphis, with her slight, sinuous figure,
draped in a red peplum, her pale face lit by dark tragic eyes, looked
the sybil to the life....

Vanderlyn bowed, with voluntary deference. "Monsieur," she said, in a
low, deep voice, "I must ask you to follow me; this is my sister's
_appartement_. I live next door."

She preceding him, they walked through an untidy dining-room of which
the furniture--the sham Renaissance chairs and walnut-wood
buffet--looked strangely alien to Vanderlyn's guide, into a short,
ill-lighted passage, which terminated in a locked, handleless door.

The woman whom he now knew to be Madame d'Elphis turned, and, facing
Vanderlyn, for the first time allowed her melancholy eyes to rest full
on her unknown visitor.

"You have your stick, your hat?" she asked. "Yes?--that is well; for
when our seance is over, you will leave by another way, a way which
leads into the garden, and so into the street."

She unlocked the door, and he followed her into a large book-lined
study--masculine in its sober colouring and simple furnishings. Above
the mantelpiece was arranged a trophy of swords and fencing-sticks;
opposite hung a superb painting by Henner. Vanderlyn remembered having
seen this picture exhibited in the Salon some five years before. It had
been shown under the title "The Crystal-Gazer," and it was even now an
admirable portrait of his hostess, for so, unconsciously, had Vanderlyn
begun to regard the woman who was so little like what he had expected to
find her.

Madame d'Elphis beckoned to him to follow her into yet another, and a
much smaller, room. Ah! This was evidently the place where she pursued
her strange calling; for here--so Vanderlyn, trying to combat the eerie
impression she produced on him, sardonically told himself--were the
stage properties of her singular craft.

The high walls were hung with red cloth, against which gleamed
innumerable plaster casts of hands. The only furniture consisted of a
round, polished table, which took up a good deal of the space in the
room; on the table stood an old-fashioned lamp, and in the middle of the
circle of light cast by the lamp on its shining surface, a round crystal
ball. Two chairs were drawn up to the table.

An extraordinary sensation of awe--of vague disquiet--crept over
Laurence Vanderlyn; he suddenly remembered the tragic story of Jeanne de
Lera. Was it here that the sinister interview with the doomed girl had
taken place?

It was Madame d'Elphis who broke the long silence:--

"I must ask you, Monsieur," she said, stiffly, "to depose the fee on the
table. It is the custom."

Vanderlyn's thin nervous hand shot up to his mouth to hide a smile; the
eerie feeling which had so curiously possessed him dropped away, leaving
him slightly ashamed.

"Poor woman," he said to himself, "she cannot even divine that I am an
honest man!"

He bent his head gravely, and took the roll of notes with which he had
come provided out of his pocket. He placed a thousand-franc note on the
table. "What a fool she must think me!" he mentally exclaimed; then came
the consoling reflection, "But she won't think me a fool for long."

Madame d'Elphis scarcely glanced at the thousand-franc note; she left it
lying where Vanderlyn had put it. "Will you please sit down, Monsieur?"
she said.

Vanderlyn rather reluctantly obeyed her. As she seated herself opposite
to him, he was struck by the sad intensity of her face; he told himself
that she had once been--nay, that she was still--beautiful, but it was
the tortured beauty of a woman who lives by and through her emotions.

He also realised that his task would not be quite as easy as he had
hoped it would be; the manner of La d'Elphis was cold, correct, and
ladylike--no other word would serve--to the point of severity. He saw
that he would have to word his offer of a bribe in as least offensive a
fashion as was possible. But while he was trying to find a sentence with
which to embark on the delicate negotiation, he suddenly felt his left
hand grasped and turned over, with a firm and yet impersonal touch.

The centre of the soothsayer's cool palm rested itself on the ring--his
mother's wedding ring--loosely encircling his little finger, and then
Madame d'Elphis began speaking in a low, quiet, and yet hesitating,
voice,--a voice which suddenly recalled to her listener her Southern
birth and breeding; it was strangely unlike the accents in which she had
asked him to produce the promised fee.

Surprise, a growing, ever-deepening surprise, kept Vanderlyn silent. He
soon forgot completely, for the time being, the business which had
brought him there.

"For you the crystal," she whispered, "for others the Grand Jeu. You
have not come, as others do, to learn the future; you do not care what
happens to you--now."

She waited a moment, then, "the ring brings with it two visions," she
said, fixing her eyes on the polished depths before her. "Visions of
love and death--of pain and parting; one, if clear, yet recedes far into
the past...."

She raised her voice, and began speaking in a monotonous recitative:

"I see you with a woman standing in a garden; behind you both is a great
expanse of water. She is so like you that I think she must be your
mother. She wears her grey hair in Madonna bands; she puts her arms
round your neck; as she does so, I see on her left hand one ring--the
ring which you are now wearing, and which I am now touching. She, your
mother, is bidding you good-bye, she knows that she will never see you
again, but you do not know it, so she smiles, for she is a brave
woman----"

Madame d'Elphis stopped speaking. Vanderlyn stared at her with a sense
of growing excitement and amazement; he was telling himself that this
woman undoubtedly possessed the power of reading not only the minds, but
even the emotional memories, of those who came to consult her.... Yes,
it was true; his last parting with his mother had been out of doors, in
the garden of their own family house on the shores of Lake Champlain.

As he looked fixedly at the crystal-gazer's downcast eyes, his own
emotions seemed to become reflected in her countenance. She grasped his
hand with a firmer, a more convulsive pressure.

"I see you again," she exclaimed, "and again with a woman! This vision
is very clear; it evokes the immediate past--almost the present. The
woman is young; her hair is fair, and in a cloud about her head. You are
together on a journey. It is night----"

Madame d'Elphis stopped speaking abruptly; she looked up at Vanderlyn,
and he saw that her dark eyes were brimming with tears, her mouth
quivering.

"Do you wish me to describe what I see?" she asked, in an almost
inaudible voice.

"No," said Vanderlyn, hoarsely,--he seemed to feel Peggy's arms about
his neck, her soft lips brushing his cheek.

The soothsayer bent down till her face was within a few inches of the
polished surface into which she was gazing.

"Now she is lying down," she whispered. "Her face is turned away. Is she
asleep? No, she is dead!--dead!"

"Can you see her now?" asked Vanderlyn. "For God's sake tell me where
she is! Can I hope to see her again--once more?"

Madame d'Elphis withdrew her hand from that of Vanderlyn.

"You will only see her face," she answered, slowly, "through the
coffin-lid. That you will see. As to where she is now--I see her
clearly, and yet,"--she went on, as if to herself, "nay, but that's
impossible! I see her," she went on, raising her voice, "laid out for
burial under a shed in a beautiful garden. The garden is that of Dr.
Fortoul's house at Orange. At the head of the pallet on which she lies
there are two blessed candles; a nun kneels on the ground. Stay,--who is
that coming in from the garden? It is the wife of the doctor, it is
Madame Fortoul,"--again there came a note of wavering doubt into the
voice of the crystal-gazer. "She is whispering to the nun, and I hear
her words; she says, 'Poor child, she is young, too young to have died
like this, alone. I am having a mass said for her soul to-morrow
morning.'"

Madame d'Elphis looked up. Her large eyes, of which the lids were
slightly reddened, rested on Vanderlyn's pale, drawn face.

"Monsieur," she said, in a low, reluctant voice, "to be honest with you,
I fear I have been leading you astray. During the last few moments it is
my own past life that has been rising before me, not the present of this
poor dead woman. When I am tired--and I am very tired to-night--some
such trick is sometimes played me. I was born at Orange; as a child I
spent many hours in the beautiful garden which just now rose up before
me; I once saw a dead body in that shed--Madame Fortoul, who is devout,
often has masses said for those who meet with sudden deaths and whose
bodies are brought to her husband."

The soothsayer rose from her chair.

"If you will come to me to-morrow," she said, "bringing with you
something which belonged to this lady, I am sure I shall be able to tell
you all you wish to know. For that second seance," she added hurriedly,
"I shall of course ask no further fee."

Vanderlyn, waking as from a dream, heard sounds in the other room, the
coming and going of a man's footsteps. He also got up.

"Madame," he said, quietly, "I thank you from my heart. I recognise the
truth of all you have told me, _with one paramount exception_. It is
true that the woman whom you saw lying dead is now in the house of Dr.
Fortoul at Orange; the fact that you once knew the place is an
accident--and nothing but an accident. You have, however, Madame, made
one strange mistake."

He took out of his pocket and held in his hand the large open envelope
containing, in addition to the remainder of the notes he had brought,
the slip he had cut from the newspaper. "Here is the proof that all you
have seen is true," he repeated, "with one exception--_This lady was
alone in the train_. It is important that this should be thoroughly
understood by you, for to-morrow you will be called upon to testify to
the fact."

Madame d'Elphis stiffened into deep attention.

"To-morrow morning," continued Vanderlyn, very deliberately, "one of
your regular clients is coming to ask you to assist him to solve a
terrible mystery. I will tell you his name--it is Mr. Pargeter, the
well-known sportsman. He is coming to ask you to help him to find
Mrs. Pargeter, who some days ago mysteriously disappeared. This
lady's death, but he does not yet know it, took place while she was
travelling--travelling alone. I repeat, Madame, that she was
_alone--quite alone--on her fatal journey_."

Vanderlyn stopped speaking a moment; then his voice lowered, became
troubled and beseeching.

"Once you have revealed the truth to Mr. Pargeter,--and he will believe
implicitly all you say,--then, Madame, you will not only have
accomplished a good action, but a sum, bringing the fee for the seance
which is just concluded up to ten thousand francs, will be placed at
your disposal by me."

Madame d'Elphis looked long and searchingly at the man standing before
her.

"Monsieur," she said, "will you give me your word that the death of Mrs.
Pargeter was as this paper declares it to have been--that is to say, a
natural death?"

"Yes," answered Vanderlyn, "she knew that she would die in this
way--suddenly."

"Then," said the fortune-teller, coldly, "I will do as you desire."

Vanderlyn, following a sudden impulse, put the envelope he held in his
hand on the table. "Here is the fee," he said, briefly. "I know that I
can trust in your discretion, your loyalty,--may I add, Madame, in your
kindness?"

"I am ashamed," she whispered, "ashamed to take this money." She clasped
her hands together in an unconscious gesture of supplication, and then
asked, with a curious childish directness, "It is a great deal--can you
afford it, Monsieur?"

"Yes," he said, hastily; the suffering, shamed expression on her face
moved him strangely.

"When you next see Mr. Pargeter," she murmured, "you shall have written
proof that I have carried out your wish."

She tapped the table twice, sharply,--then led the way into the larger
room. It was empty, but Vanderlyn, even as he entered, saw a door
closing quietly.

Madame d'Elphis walked across to an un-curtained window; she opened it
and stepped through on to a broad terrace balcony.

"Walk down the iron stairway," she said, in a low voice, "there are not
many steps. A little door leads from the garden below straight into the
street; the door has been left unlocked to-night."

Vanderlyn held out his hand; she took it and held it for a moment. "Ah!"
she said, softly, "would that _I_ had died when I was still young, still
beautiful, still loved!--"




XII.


The bright May sun was pouring into Tom Pargeter's large smoking-room,
making more alive and vivid the fantastic and brilliantly-coloured
posters lining the walls.

Laurence Vanderlyn, standing there in a peopled solitude, caught a
glimpse of his own strained and tired face in a mirror which filled up
the space between two windows, and what he saw startled him, for it
seemed to him that none could look at his countenance and not see
written there the tale of his anguish, remorse, and suspense. And yet he
knew that now his ordeal was drawing to a close; in a few moments
Pargeter was due to return from his interview with Madame d'Elphis.

Walking up and down the sunny room which held for him such agonising
memories of the long hours spent there during the last three days in Tom
Pargeter's company, Vanderlyn lived again every moment of his own
strange interview with the soothsayer. The impression of sincerity which
Madame d'Elphis had produced on him had now had time to fade, and he
asked himself with nervous dread whether she was, after all, likely to
do what she had promised. Nay, was it in her power to lie,--or rather to
tell the half-truth which was all that he had asked her to tell?

At last there came the sound of the front-door of the villa opening,
shutting; and then those made by Pargeter's quick, short footsteps
striking the marble floor of the hall, and echoing through the silent
house.

Vanderlyn stopped short in his restless pacing. He turned and waited.

The door was flung open, and Pargeter came in. Quietly shutting the door
behind him, he walked down the room to where the other man, with his
back to the window, stood waiting for him. The three days and nights
which had carved indelible lines on the American's already seamed face,
had left Pargeter's untouched; just now he looked grave, subdued, but
his face had lost the expression of perplexed anger and anxiety which
had alone betrayed the varying emotions he had experienced since the
disappearance of his wife.

At last, when close to Vanderlyn, he spoke--in a low, gruff whisper.
"Grid!" he exclaimed, "Grid, old man, don't be shocked! La d'Elphis says
that Peggy's dead--that she's been dead three days!"

Vanderlyn could not speak. He stared dumbly at the other, and as he
realised the relief, almost the joy, in Pargeter's voice, there came
over him a horrible impulse to strike--and then to flee.

"There, you can see it for yourself--" Pargeter held out, with fingers
twitching with excitement, a sheet of note-paper. "La d'Elphis wrote it
all down! I didn't see her--she's ill. But this is not the first time
I've had to work her in that way, and it does just as well. Her sister
managed everything,--she took her in one of Peggy's gloves which I'd
brought with me."

Vanderlyn shuddered. He opened his mouth, but no words would come. Then
he looked down at the sheet of paper Pargeter had handed him:--

     "The person to whom this glove belonged has been dead three days.
     She died on a journey--alone. Think of the bridal flower,--it will
     guide you to where she now lies waiting for those who loved her to
     claim her."

Pargeter laid one hand on Vanderlyn's arm--with the other he took out of
one of his pockets a sheaf of thin slips of paper. The American knew
them to contain accounts of accidents and untoward occurrences
registered at the Prefecture of Police.

Pargeter detached one of the slips and laid it across the sheet of paper
on which Madame d'Elphis had written her laconic message:--

"Look--look at _this_, Grid! And don't say again I'm a fool for
believing in La d'Elphis! I've had this since the day before yesterday;
but I didn't bother to show it to you, for I didn't think anything of
it--I shouldn't now, but for La d'Elphis! But do look--'the body of a
young, fair woman found in a train at _Orange_,'--'the bridal flower,'
as La d'Elphis says--eh, what?"

But still Vanderlyn did not speak.

"I've thought it all out," Pargeter went on, excitedly. "Peggy was
driven to the wrong station--see? Got into the wrong train--and
then--then, Grid, when she found out what she'd done, she got
upset----" For the first time a note of awe, of horror, came into his
voice--"You see, my sister Sophy was right, after all; the poor girl's
heart was queer!"

"And what are you going to do now?" asked Vanderlyn in a low, dry tone.
"Arrange for a special to Orange, I suppose? What time will you start,
Tom? Would you like me to come with you?"

Pargeter reddened; his green eye blinked as if he felt suddenly blinded
by the bright sun.

"I'm not thinking of going myself," he said, rather ashamedly. "Where
would be the good of it? Her brother and that cousin of hers are sure to
want to go. They can take Plimmer. The truth is--well, old man, I don't
feel up to it! I've always had an awful horror of death. Peggy knew that
well enough----" the colour faded from his face; he looked at the other
with a nervous, dejected expression.

"Tom," said Vanderlyn, slowly, "why shouldn't _I_ go to Orange--with
Madame de Lera? Why say anything to Peggy's people till we really know?"

For the first time Pargeter seemed moved to genuine human feeling.
"Well," he said, "you _are_ a good friend, Grid! I'll never forget how
you've stood by me during this worrying time. I wish I could do
something for you in return----" he looked at the other doubtfully. To
poor Tom Pargeter, "doing something" always meant parting with money,
and Laurence Vanderlyn was, if not rich, then quite well off.

Vanderlyn's hand suddenly shook. He dropped the piece of paper he had
been holding. "Perhaps you'll let me have Jasper sometimes--in the
holidays," he said, huskily.

"Lord, yes! Of course I will! There's nothing would please poor Peggy
more! Then--then when will you start, Grid? I mean for Orange?"

"At once," said Vanderlyn. Then he looked long, hesitatingly at
Pargeter, and the millionaire, with most unusual perspicacity, read and
answered the question contained in that strange, uncertain gaze.

"Don't bring her back, Grid! I couldn't stand a big funeral here. I
don't want to hear any more about it than I can help! Of course, it
isn't much good my going over to England _now_; but I won't stay in
Paris, I'll get away,--right away for a bit, on the yacht,--and take
some of the crowd with me."

       *       *       *       *       *

No one ever knew the truth. To the Prefect of Police the mystery of the
disappearance of Mrs. Pargeter is still unsolved--unsolvable. When he
meets a pretty woman out at dinner he tells her the story--and asks her
what she thinks.

As for Laurence Vanderlyn, he has gone home--home to the old colonial
house which was built by his great-grandfather, the friend of Franklin,
on the shores of Lake Champlain. He never speaks of Peggy excepting to
Jasper; but to the lad he sometimes talks of her as if she were still
there, still very near to them both, near enough to be grieved if her
boy should ever forget that he had a mother who loved him dearly.


THE END.








End of Project Gutenberg's The Uttermost Farthing, by Marie Belloc Lowndes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UTTERMOST FARTHING ***

***** This file should be named 18927.txt or 18927.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/9/2/18927/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
